A Mask Presented at Ludlow Castle, 1634

The Persons
The attendant Spirit afterwards in the habit of Thyrsis
Comus with his crew
The Lady
1. Brother
2. Brother
Sabrina, the Nymph

The cheif persons which presented, were

The Lord Bracly,
Mr. Thomas Egerton, his Brother,
The Lady Alice Egerton.

The first Scene discovers a wilde Wood.

The attendant Spirit descends or enters.

Before the starry threshold of Joves Court
My mansion is, where those immortal shapes
Of bright aëreal Spirits live insphear'd
In Regions milde of calm and serene Ayr,
Above the smoak and stirr of this dim spot, 
Which men call Earth, and with low-thoughted care
Confin'd, and pester'd in this pin-fold here,
Strive to keep up a frail, and Feaverish being
Unmindfull of the crown that Vertue gives
After this mortal change, to her true Servants 
Amongst the enthron'd gods on Sainted seats.
Yet som there be that by due steps aspire
To lay their just hands on that Golden Key
That ope's the Palace of Eternity:
To such my errand is, and but for such, 
I would not soil these pure Ambrosial weeds,
With the rank vapours of this Sin-worn mould.

But to my task. Neptune besides the sway
Of every salt Flood, and each ebbing Stream,
Took in by lot 'twixt high, and neather Jove, 
Imperial rule of all the Sea-girt Iles
That like to rich, and various gemms inlay
The unadorned bosom of the Deep,
Which he to grace his tributary gods
By course commits to severall goverment, 
And gives them leave to wear their Saphire crowns,
And weild their little tridents, but this Ile
The greatest, and the best of all the main
He quarters to his blu-hair'd deities,
And all this tract that fronts the falling Sun 
A noble Peer of mickle trust, and power
Has in his charge, with temper'd awe to guide
An old, and haughty Nation proud in Arms:
Where his fair off-spring nurs't in Princely lore,
Are coming to attend their Fathers state, 
And new-entrusted Scepter, but their way
Lies through the perplex't paths of this drear Wood,
The nodding horror of whose shady brows
Threats the forlorn and wand'ring Passinger.
And here their tender age might suffer perill, 
But that by quick command from Soveran Jove
I was dispatcht for their defence, and guard;
And listen why, for I will tell ye now
What never yet was heard in Tale or Song
From old, or modern Bard in Hall, or Bowr. 

Bacchus that first from out the purple Grape,
Crush't the sweet poyson of mis-used Wine
After the Tuscan Mariners transform'd
Coasting the Tyrrhene shore, as the winds listed,
On Circes Iland fell (who knows not Circe 
The daughter of the Sun? Whose charmed Cup
Whoever tasted, lost his upright shape,
And downward fell into a groveling Swine)
This Nymph that gaz'd upon his clustring locks,
With Ivy berries wreath'd, and his blithe youth, 
Had by him, ere he parted thence, a Son
Much like his Father, but his Mother more,
Whom therfore she brought up and Comus nam'd,
Who ripe, and frolick of his full grown age,
Roaving the Celtick, and Iberian fields, 
At last betakes him to this ominous Wood,
And in thick shelter of black shades imbowr'd,
Excells his Mother at her mighty Art,
Offring to every weary Travailer,
His orient liquor in a Crystal Glasse, 
To quench the drouth of Phoebus, which as they taste
(For most do taste through fond intemperate thirst)
Soon as the Potion works, their human count'nance,
Th' express resemblance of the gods, is chang'd
Into some brutish form of Woolf, or Bear, 
Or Ounce, or Tiger, Hog, or bearded Goat,
All other parts remaining as they were,
And they, so perfect is their misery,
Not once perceive their foul disfigurement,
But boast themselves more comely then before 
And all their friends, and native home forget
To roule with pleasure in a sensual sty.
Therfore when any favour'd of high Jove,
Chances to pass through this adventrous glade,
Swift as the Sparkle of a glancing Star, 
I shoot from Heav'n to give him safe convoy,
As now I do: But first I must put off
These my skie robes spun out of Iris Wooff,
And take the Weeds and likenes of a Swain,
That to the service of this house belongs, 
Who with his soft Pipe, and smooth-dittied Song,
Well knows to still the wilde winds when they roar,
And hush the waving Woods, nor of lesse faith,
And in this office of his Mountain watch,
Likeliest, and neerest to the present ayd 
Of this occasion. But I hear the tread
Of hatefull steps, I must be viewless now.

Comus enters with a Charming Rod in one hand, his Glass in the other, with him a rout of Monsters headed like sundry sorts of wilde Beasts, but otherwise like Men and Women, their Apparel glistering, they com in making a riotous and unruly noise, with Torches in their hands.

Comus. The Star that bids the Shepherd fold,
Now the top of Heav'n doth hold,
And the gilded Car of Day, 
His glowing Axle doth allay
In the steep Atlantick stream,
And the slope Sun his upward beam
Shoots against the dusky Pole,
Pacing toward the other gole 
Of his Chamber in the East.
Mean while welcom Joy, and Feast,
Midnight shout, and revelry,
Tipsie dance and Jollity.
Braid your Locks with rosie Twine 
Dropping odours, dropping Wine.
Rigor now is gone to bed,
And Advice with scrupulous head,
Strict Age, and sowre Severity,
With their grave Saws in slumber ly. 
We that are of purer fire
Imitate the Starry Quire,
Who in their nightly watchfull Sphears,
Lead in swift round the Months and Years.
The Sounds, and Seas with all their finny drove 
Now to the Moon in wavering Morrice move,
And on the Tawny Sands and Shelves,
Trip the pert Fairies and the dapper Elves;
By dimpled Brook, and Fountain brim,
The Wood-Nymphs deckt with Daisies trim, 
Their merry wakes and pastimes keep:
What hath night to do with sleep?
Night hath better sweets to prove,
Venus now wakes, and wak'ns Love.
Com let us our rights begin, 
Tis onely day-light that makes Sin,
Which these dun shades will ne're report.
Hail Goddesse of Nocturnal sport
Dark vaild Cotytto, t' whom the secret flame
Of mid-night Torches burns; mysterious Dame 
That ne're art call'd, but when the Dragon woom
Of Stygian darknes spets her thickest gloom,
And makes one blot of all the ayr,
Stay thy cloudy Ebon chair,
Wherin thou rid'st with Hecat', and befriend 
Us thy vow'd Priests, till utmost end
Of all thy dues be done, and none left out,
Ere the blabbing Eastern scout,
The nice Morn on th' Indian steep
From her cabin'd loop hole peep, 
And to the tel-tale Sun discry
Our conceal'd Solemnity.
Com, knit hands, and beat the ground,
In a light fantastick round.

The Measure.

Break off, break off, I feel the different pace, 
Of som chast footing neer about this ground.
Run to your shrouds, within these Brakes and Trees,
Our number may affright: Som Virgin sure
(For so I can distinguish by mine Art)
Benighted in these Woods. Now to my charms, 
And to my wily trains, I shall e're long
Be well stock't with as fair a herd as graz'd
About my Mother Circe.   Thus I hurl
My dazling Spells into the spungy ayr,
Of power to cheat the eye with blear illusion, 
And give it false presentments, lest the place
And my quaint habits breed astonishment,
And put the Damsel to suspicious flight,
Which must not be, for that's against my course;
I under fair pretence of friendly ends, 
And well-plac't words of glozing courtesie,
Baited with reasons not unplausible
Wind me into the easie-hearted man,
And hugg him into snares. When once her eye
Hath met the vertue of this Magick dust, 
I shall appear som harmles Villager
Whom thrift keeps up about his Country gear,
But here she comes, I fairly step aside
And hearken, if I may, her busines here.

The Lady enters.

This way the noise was, if mine ear be true, 
My best guide now, me thought it was the sound
Of Riot, and ill-manag'd Merriment,
Such as the jocund Flute, or gamesom Pipe
Stirs up among the loose unleter'd Hinds,
When for their teeming Flocks, and granges full 
In wanton dance they praise the bounteous Pan,
And thank the gods amiss. I should be loath
To meet the rudeness, and swill'd insolence
Of such late Wassailers; yet O where els
Shall I inform my unacquainted feet 
In the blind mazes of this tangl'd Wood?
My Brothers when they saw me wearied out
With this long way, resolving here to lodge
Under the spreading favour of these Pines,
Stept as they se'd to the next Thicket side 
To bring me Berries, or such cooling fruit
As the kind hospitable Woods provide.
They left me then, when the gray-hooded Eev'n
Like a sad Votarist in Palmers weed
Rose from the hindmost wheels of Phoebus wain. 
But where they are, and why they came not back,
Is now the labour of my thoughts; 'tis likeliest
They had ingag'd their wandring steps too far,
And envious darknes, e're they could return,
Had stole them from me, els O theevish Night 
Why shouldst thou, but for som fellonious end,
In thy dark lantern thus close up the Stars,
That nature hung in Heav'n, and fill'd their Lamps
With everlasting oil, to give due light
To the misled and lonely Travailer? 
This is the place, as well as I may guess,
Whence eev'n now the tumult of loud Mirth
Was rife, and perfet in my list'ning ear,
Yet nought but single darknes do I find.
What might this be? A thousand fantasies 
Begin to throng into my memory
Of calling shapes and beckning shadows dire,
And airy tongues, that syllable mens names
On Sands, and Shoars, and desert Wildernesses.
These thoughts may startle well, but not astound 
The vertuous mind, that ever walks attended
By a strong siding champion Conscience.——
O welcom pure-ey'd Faith, white-handed Hope,
Thou hov'ring Angel girt with golden wings,
And thou unblemish't form of Chastity, 
I see ye visibly, and now beleeve
That he, the Supreme good, t' whom all things ill
Are but as slavish officers of vengeance,
Would send a glistring Guardian if need were
To keep my life and honour unassail'd. 
Was I deceiv'd, or did a sable cloud
Turn forth her silver lining on the night?
I did not err, there does a sable cloud
Turn forth her silver lining on the night,
And casts a gleam over this tufted Grove. 
I cannot hallo to my Brothers, but
Such noise as I can make to be heard farthest
Ile venter, for my new enliv'n'd spirits
Prompt me; and they perhaps are not far off.

SONG.

Sweet Echo, sweetest Nymph that liv'st unseen 
Within thy airy shell
By slow Meander's margent green,
And in the violet imbroider'd vale
Where the love-lorn Nightingale
Nightly to thee her sad Song mourneth well. 
Canst thou not tell me of a gentle Pair
That likest thy Narcissus are?
O if thou have
Hid them in some flowry Cave,
Tell me but where 
Sweet Queen of Parly, Daughter of the Sphear,
So maist thou be translated to the skies,
And give resounding grace to all Heav'ns Harmonies.

Com. Can any mortal mixture of Earths mould
Breath such Divine inchanting ravishment? 
Sure somthing holy lodges in that brest,
And with these raptures moves the vocal air
To testifie his hidd'n residence;
How sweetly did they float upon the wings
Of silence, through the empty-vaulted night 
At every fall smoothing the Raven doune
Of darknes till it smil'd: I have oft heard
My mother Circe with the Sirens three,
Amidst the flowry-kirtl'd Naiades
Culling their Potent hearbs, and balefull drugs, 
Who as they sung, would take the prison'd soul,
And lap it in Elysium, Scylla wept,
And chid her barking waves into attention,
And fell Charybdis murmur'd soft applause:
Yet they in pleasing slumber lull'd the sense, 
And in sweet madnes rob'd it of it self,
But such a sacred, and home-felt delight,
Such sober certainty of waking bliss
I never heard till now. Ile speak to her
And she shall be my Queen. Hail forren wonder 
Whom certain these rough shades did never breed
Unlesse the Goddes that in rurall shrine
Dwell'st here with Pan, or Silvan, by blest Song
Forbidding every bleak unkindly Fog
To touch the prosperous growth of this tall Wood. 

La. Nay gentle Shepherd ill is lost that praise
That is addrest to unattending Ears,
Not any boast of skill, but extreme shift
How to regain my sever'd company
Compell'd me to awake the courteous Echo 
To give me answer from her mossie Couch.

Co. What chance good Lady hath bereft you thus?

La. Dim darknes, and this heavy Labyrinth.

Co. Could that divide you from neer-ushering guides?

La. They left me weary on a grassie terf. 

Co. By falshood, or discourtesie, or why?

La. To seek i'th vally som cool friendly Spring.

Co. And left your fair side all unguarded, Lady?

La. They were but twain, and purpos'd quick return.

Co. Perhaps fore-stalling night prevented them. 

La. How easie my misfortune is to hit!

Com. Imports their loss, beside the present need?

La. No less then if I should my brothers loose.

Co. Were they of manly prime, or youthful bloom?

La. As smooth as Hebe's their unrazor'd lips. 

Co. Two such I saw, what time the labour'd Oxe
In his loose traces from the furrow came,
And the swink't hedger at his Supper sate;
I saw them under a green mantling vine
That crawls along the side of yon small hill, 
Plucking ripe clusters from the tender shoots,
Their port was more then human, as they stood;
I took it for a faëry vision
Of som gay creatures of the element
That in the colours of the Rainbow live 
And play i'th plighted clouds. I was aw-strook,
And as I past, I worshipt: if those you seek,
It were a journey like the path to Heav'n
To help you find them.  La. Gentle villager
What readiest way would bring me to that place? 

Co. Due west it rises from this shrubby point.

La. To find out that, good Shepherd, I suppose,
In such a scant allowance of Star-light,
Would overtask the best Land-Pilots art,
Without the sure guess of well-practiz'd feet. 

Co. I know each lane, and every alley green
Dingle or bushy dell of this wilde Wood,
And every bosky bourn from side to side
My daily walks and ancient neighbourhood,
And if your stray attendance be yet lodg'd, 
Or shroud within these limits, I shall know
Ere morrow wake, or the low roosted lark
From her thach't pallat rowse, if otherwise
I can conduct you Lady to a low
But loyal cottage, where you may be safe 
Till further quest'.  La. Shepherd I take thy word,
And trust thy honest offer'd courtesie,
Which oft is sooner found in lowly sheds
With smoaky rafters, then in tapstry Halls
And Courts of Princes, where it first was nam'd, 
And yet is most pretended: In a place
Less warranted then this, or less secure
I cannot be, that I should fear to change it,
Eie me blest Providence, and square my triall
To my proportion'd strength. Shepherd lead on.—— 

The two Brothers.

Eld. Bro. Unmuffle ye faint stars, and thou fair Moon
That wontst to love the travailers benizon,
Stoop thy pale visage through an amber cloud,
And disinherit Chaos, that raigns here
In double night of darknes, and of shades; 
Or if your influence be quite damm'd up
With black usurping mists, som gentle taper
Though a rush Candle from the wicker hole
Of som clay habitation visit us
With thy long levell'd rule of streaming light, 
And thou shalt be our star of Arcady,
Or Tyrian Cynosure.   2 Bro. Or if our eyes
Be barr'd that happines, might we but hear
The folded flocks pen'd in their watled cotes,
Or sound of pastoral reed with oaten stops, 
Or whistle from the Lodge, or village cock
Count the night watches to his feathery Dames,
T' would be som solace yet, som little chearing
In this close dungeon of innumerous bowes.
But O that haples virgin our lost sister 
Where may she wander now, whether betake her
From the chill dew, amongst rude burrs and thistles?
Perhaps som cold bank is her boulster now
Or 'gainst the rugged bark of som broad Elm
Leans her unpillow'd head fraught with sad fears. 
What if in wild amazement, and affright,
Or while we speak within the direful grasp
Of Savage hunger, or of Savage heat?

Eld. Bro. Peace brother, be not over-exquisite
To cast the fashion of uncertain evils; 
For grant they be so, while they rest unknown,
What need a man forestall his date of grief,
And run to meet what he would most avoid?
Or if they be but false alarms of Fear,
How bitter is such self-delusion? 
I do not think my sister so to seek,
Or so unprincipl'd in vertue's book,
And the sweet peace that goodnes boosoms ever,
As that the single want of light and noise
(Not being in danger, as I trust she is not) 
Could stir the constant mood of her calm thoughts,
And put them into mis-becoming plight.
Vertue could see to do what vertue would
By her own radiant light, though Sun and Moon
Were in the flat Sea sunk. And Wisdoms self 
Oft seeks to sweet retired Solitude,
Where with her best nurse Contemplation
She plumes her feathers, and lets grow her wings
That in the various bussle of resort
Were all to ruffl'd, and somtimes impair'd. 
He that has light within his own cleer brest
May sit i'th center, and enjoy bright day,
But he that hides a dark soul, and foul thoughts
Benighted walks under the mid-day Sun;
Himself is his own dungeon. 

2 Bro. Tis most true
That musing meditation most affects
The Pensive secrecy of desert cell,
Far from the cheerfull haunt of men, and herds,
And sits as safe as in a Senat house,
For who would rob a Hermit of his Weeds, 
His few Books, or his Beads, or Maple Dish,
Or do his gray hairs any violence?
But beauty like the fair Hesperian Tree
Laden with blooming gold, had need the guard
Of dragon watch with uninchanted eye, 
To save her blossoms, and defend her fruit
From the rash hand of bold Incontinence.
You may as well spred out the unsun'd heaps
Of Misers treasure by an out-laws den,
And tell me it is safe, as bid me hope 
Danger will wink on Opportunity,
And let a single helpless maiden pass
Uninjur'd in this wilde surrounding wast.
Of night, or lonelines it recks me not,
I fear the dred events that dog them both, 
Lest som ill greeting touch attempt the person
Of our unowned sister.

Eld. Bro. I do not brother,
Inferr as if I thought my sisters state
Secure without all doubt, or controversie:
Yet where an equall poise of hope and fear 
Does arbitrate th' event, my nature is
That I encline to hope, rather then fear,
And gladly banish squint suspicion.
My sister is not so defenceless left
As you imagine, she has a hidden strength 
Which you remember not.

2 Bro. What hidden strength,
Unless the strength of Heav'n, if you mean that?

Eld. Bro. I mean that too, but yet a hidden strength
Which if Heav'n gave it, may be term'd her own:
'Tis chastity, my brother, chastity: 
She that has that, is clad in compleat steel,
And like a quiver'd Nymph with Arrows keen
May trace huge Forests, and unharbour'd Heaths,
Infamous Hills, and sandy perilous wildes,
Where through the sacred rayes of Chastity, 
No savage fierce, Bandite, or mountaneer
Will dare to soyl her Virgin purity,
Yea there, where very desolation dwels
By grots, and caverns shag'd with horrid shades,
She may pass on with unblench't majesty, 
Be it not don in pride, or in presumption.
Som say no evil thing that walks by night
In fog, or fire, by lake, or moorish fen,
Blew meager Hag, or stubborn unlaid ghost,
That breaks his magick chains at curfeu time, 
No goblin or swart Faëry of the mine,
Hath hurtfull power o're true virginity.
Do ye beleeve me yet, or shall I call
Antiquity from the old Schools of Greece
To testifie the arms of Chastity? 
Hence had the huntress Dian her dred bow,
Fair silver-shafted Queen for ever chaste,
Wherwith she tam'd the brinded lioness
And spotted mountain pard, but set at nought
The frivolous bolt of Cupid, gods and men 
Fear'd her stern frown, and she was queen oth' Woods.
What was that snaky-headed Gorgon sheild
That wise Minerva wore, unconquer'd Virgin,
Wherwith she freez'd her foes to congeal'd stone?
But rigid looks of Chaste austerity 
And noble grace that dash't brute violence
With sudden adoration, and blank aw.
So dear to Heav'n is Saintly chastity,
That when a soul is found sincerely so,
A thousand liveried Angels lacky her, 
Driving far off each thing of sin and guilt,
And in cleer dream, and solemn vision
Tell her of things that no gross ear can hear,
Till oft convers with heav'nly habitants
Begin to cast a beam on th' outward shape, 
The unpolluted temple of the mind,
And turns it by degrees to the souls essence,
Till all be made immortal: but when lust
By unchaste looks, loose gestures, and foul talk,
But most by leud and lavish act of sin, 
Lets in defilement to the inward parts,
The soul grows clotted by contagion,
Imbodies, and imbrutes, till she quite loose
The divine property of her first being.
Such are those thick and gloomy shadows damp 
Oft seen in Charnell vaults, and Sepulchers
Lingering, and sitting by a new made grave,
As loath to leave the body that it lov'd,
And link't it self by carnal sensualty
To a degenerate and degraded state. 

2 Bro. How charming is divine Philosophy!
Not harsh, and crabbed as dull fools suppose,
But musical as is Apollo's lute,
And a perpetual feast of nectar'd sweets,
Where no crude surfet raigns.   Eld. Bro. List, list, I hear 
Som far off hallow break the silent Air.

2 Bro. Methought so too; what should it be?

Eld. Bro. For certain
Either som one like us night-founder'd here,
Or els som neighbour Wood-man, or at worst,
Som roaving Robber calling to his fellows. 

2 Bro. Heav'n keep my sister, agen agen and neer,
Best draw, and stand upon our guard.

Eld. Bro. Ile hallow,
If he be friendly he comes well, if not,
Defence is a good cause, and Heav'n be for us.

The attendant Spirit habited like a Shepherd.

That hallow I should know, what are you? speak; 
Com not too neer, you fall on iron stakes else.

Spir. What voice is that, my young Lord? speak agen.

2 Bro. O brother, 'tis my fathers Shepherd sure.

Eld. Bro. Thyrsis? Whose artful strains have oft delaid
The huddling brook to hear his madrigal, 
And sweeten'd every muskrose of the dale,
How cam'st thou here good Swain? hath any ram
Slip't from the fold, or young Kid lost his dam,
Or straggling weather the pen't flock forsook?
How couldst thou find this dark sequester'd nook? 

Spir. O my lov'd masters heir, and his next joy,
I came not here on such a trivial toy
As a stray'd Ewe, or to pursue the stealth
Of pilfering Woolf, not all the fleecy wealth
That doth enrich these Downs, is worth a thought 
To this my errand, and the care it brought.
But O my Virgin Lady, where is she?
How chance she is not in your company?

Eld. Bro. To tell thee sadly Shepherd, without blame,
Or our neglect, we lost her as we came. 

Spirit. Ay me unhappy! then my fears are true.

Eld. Bro. What fears good Thyrsis? Prethee briefly shew.

Spir. Ile tell ye, 'tis not vain, or fabulous,
(Though so esteem'd by shallow ignorance)
What the sage Poëts taught by th' heav'nly Muse, 
Storied of old in high immortal vers
Of dire Chimera's and inchanted Iles,
And rifted Rocks whose entrance leads to hell,
For such there be, but unbelief is blind.

Within the navil of this hideous Wood, 
Immur'd in cypress shades a Sorcerer dwels
Of Bacchus, and of Circe born, great Comus,
Deep skill'd in all his mothers witcheries,
And here to every thirsty wanderer,
By sly enticement gives his banefull cup, 
With many murmurs mixt, whose pleasing poison
The visage quite transforms of him that drinks,
And the inglorious likenes of a beast
Fixes instead, unmoulding reasons mintage
Character'd in the face; this have I learn't 
Tending my flocks hard by i'th hilly crofts,
That brow this bottom glade, whence night by night
He and his monstrous rout are heard to howl
Like stabl'd wolves, or tigers at their prey,
Doing abhorred rites to Hecate 
In their obscured haunts of inmost bowres.
Yet have they many baits, and guileful spells
To inveigle and invite th' unwary sense
Of them that pass unweeting by the way.
This evening late by then the chewing flocks 
Had ta'n their supper on the savoury Herb
Of Knot-grass dew-besprent, and were in fold,
I sate me down to watch upon a bank
With Ivy canopied, and interwove
With flaunting Hony-suckle, and began 
Wrapt in a pleasing fit of melancholy
To meditate my rural minstrelsie,
Till fancy had her fill, but ere a close
The wonted roar was up amidst the Woods,
And fill'd the Air with barbarous dissonance, 
At which I ceas't, and listen'd them a while,
Till an unusual stop of sudden silence
Gave respite to the drowsie frighted steeds
That draw the litter of close-curtain'd sleep.
At last a soft and solemn breathing sound 
Rose like a steam of rich distill'd Perfumes,
And stole upon the Air, that even Silence
Was took e're she was ware, and wish't she might
Deny her nature, and be never more
Still to be so displac't. I was all eare, 
And took in strains that might create a soul
Under the ribs of Death; but O ere long
Too well I did perceive it was the voice
Of my most honour'd Lady, your dear sister.
Amaz'd I stood, harrow'd with grief and fear, 
And O poor hapless Nightingale thought I,
How sweet thou sing'st, how neer the deadly snare!
Then down the Lawns I ran with headlong hast
Through paths, and turnings oft'n trod by day,
Till guided by mine ear I found the place 
Where that damn'd wisard hid in sly disguise
(For so by certain signes I knew) had met
Already, ere my best speed could prævent,
The aidless innocent Lady his wish't prey,
Who gently ask't if he had seen such two, 
Supposing him som neighbour villager;
Longer I durst not stay, but soon I guess't
Ye were the two she mean't, with that I sprung
Into swift flight, till I had found you here,
But furder know I not.   2 Bro. O night and shades, 
How are ye joyn'd with hell in triple knot
Against th' unarmed weakness of one Virgin
Alone, and helpless! Is this the confidence
You gave me Brother?   Eld. Bro. Yes, and keep it still,
Lean on it safely, not a period 
Shall be unsaid for me: against the threats
Of malice or of sorcery, or that power
Which erring men call Chance, this I hold firm;
Vertue may be assail'd, but never hurt,
Surpriz'd by unjust force, but not enthrall'd, 
Yea even that which mischief meant most harm,
Shall in the happy trial prove most glory.
But evil on it self shall back recoyl,
And mix no more with goodness, when at last
Gather'd like scum, and setl'd to it self 
It shall be in eternal restless change
Self-fed, and self-consum'd; if this fail,
The pillar'd firmament is rott'nness,
And earths base built on stubble. But com let's on.
Against th' opposing will and arm of Heav'n 
May never this just sword be lifted up,
But for that damn'd magician, let him be girt
With all the greisly legions that troop
Under the sooty flag of Acheron,
Harpyies and Hydra's, or all the monstrous forms 
'Twixt Africa, and Inde, Ile find him out,
And force him to restore his purchase back,
Or drag him by the curls, to a foul death,
Curs'd as his life.

Spir. Alas good ventrous youth,
I love thy courage yet and bold Emprise, 
But here thy sword can do thee little stead;
Farr other arms, and other weapons must
Be those that quell the might of hellish charms,
He with his bare wand can unthred thy joynts,
And crumble all thy sinews. 

Eld. Bro. Why, prethee Shepherd
How durst thou then thy self approach so neer
As to make this relation?

Spir. Care and utmost shifts
How to secure the Lady from surprisal,
Brought to my mind a certain Shepherd Lad
Of small regard to see to, yet well skill'd 
In every vertuous plant and healing herb
That spreads her verdant leaf to th' morning ray,
He lov'd me well, and oft would beg me sing,
Which when I did, he on the tender grass
Would sit, and hearken even to ecstasie, 
And in requitall ope his leather'n scrip,
And shew me simples of a thousand names
Telling their strange and vigorous faculties;
Amongst the rest a small unsightly root,
But of divine effect, he cull'd me out; 
The leaf was darkish, and had prickles on it,
But in another Countrey, as he said,
Bore a bright golden flowre, but not in this soyl:
Unknown, and like esteem'd, and the dull swayn
Treads on it daily with his clouted shoon, 
And yet more med'cinal is it then that Moly
That Hermes once to wise Ulysses gave;
He call'd it Hæmony, and gave it me,
And bade me keep it as of sovran use
'Gainst all inchantments, mildew blast, or damp 
Or gastly furies apparition;
I purs't it up, but little reck'ning made,
Till now that this extremity compell'd,
But now I find it true; for by this means
I knew the foul inchanter though disguis'd, 
Enter'd the very lime-twigs of his spells,
And yet came off: if you have this about you
(As I will give you when we go) you may
Boldly assault the necromancers hall;
Where if he be, with dauntless hardihood, 
And brandish't blade rush on him, break his glass,
And shed the lushious liquor on the ground,
But sease his wand; though he and his curst crew
Feirce signe of battail make, and menace high,
Or like the sons of Vulcan vomit smoak, 
Yet will they soon retire, if he but shrink.

Eld. Bro. Thyrsis lead on apace, Ile follow thee,
And som good angel bear a sheild before us.

The Scene changes to a stately Palace, set out with all manner of deliciousness; soft Musick, Tables spred with all dainties. Comus appears with his rabble, and the Lady set in an inchanted Chair, to whom he offers his Glass, which she puts by, and goes about to rise.

Comus. Nay Lady sit; if I but wave this wand,
Your nervs are all chain'd up in Alabaster, 
And you a statue; or as Daphne was
Root-bound, that fled Apollo,

La. Fool do not boast,
Thou canst not touch the freedom of my minde
With all thy charms, although this corporal rinde
Thou haste immanacl'd, while Heav'n sees good. 

Co. Why are you vext, Lady? why do you frown?
Here dwell no frowns, nor anger, from these gates
Sorrow flies farr: See here be all the pleasures
That fancy can beget on youthful thoughts,
When the fresh blood grows lively, and returns 
Brisk as the April buds in Primrose-season.
And first behold this cordial Julep here
That flames, and dances in his crystal bounds
With spirits of balm, and fragrant Syrops mixt.
Not that Nepenthes which the wife of Thone, 
In Egypt gave to Jove-born Helena
Is of such power to stir up joy as this,
To life so friendly, or so cool to thirst.
Why should you be so cruel to your self,
And to those dainty limms which nature lent 
For gentle usage, and soft delicacy?
But you invert the cov'nants of her trust,
And harshly deal like an ill borrower
With that which you receiv'd on other terms,
Scorning the unexempt condition 
By which all mortal frailty must subsist,
Refreshment after toil, ease after pain,
That have been tir'd all day without repast,
And timely rest have wanted, but fair Virgin
This will restore all soon. 

La. 'Twill not, false traitor,
'Twill not restore the truth and honesty
That thou hast banish't from thy tongue with lies,
Was this the cottage, and the safe abode
Thou told'st me of? What grim aspects are these,
These oughly-headed Monsters? Mercy guard me! 
Hence with thy brew'd inchantments, foul deceiver,
Hast thou betrai'd my credulous innocence
With visor'd falshood and base forgery,
And wouldst thou seek again to trap me here
With lickerish baits fit to ensnare a brute? 
Were it a draft for Juno when she banquets,
I would not taste thy treasonous offer; none
But such as are good men can give good things,
And that which is not good, is not delicious
To a wel-govern'd and wise appetite. 

Co. O foolishness of men! that lend their ears
To those budge doctors of the Stoick Furr,
And fetch their precepts from the Cynick Tub,
Praising the lean and sallow Abstinence.
Wherefore did Nature powre her bounties forth, 
With such a full and unwithdrawing hand,
Covering the earth with odours, fruits, and flocks,
Thronging the Seas with spawn innumerable,
But all to please, and sate the curious taste?
And set to work millions of spinning Worms, 
That in their green shops weave the smooth-hair'd silk
To deck her Sons; and that no corner might
Be vacant of her plenty, in her own loyns
She hutch't th' all-worshipt ore and precious gems
To store her children with; if all the world 
Should in a pet of temperance feed on Pulse,
Drink the clear stream, and nothing wear but Frieze,
Th' all-giver would be unthank't, would be unprais'd,
Not half his riches known, and yet despis'd,
And we should serve him as a grudging master, 
As a penurious niggard of his wealth,
And live like Natures bastards, not her sons,
Who would be quite surcharg'd with her own weight,
And strangl'd with her waste fertility;
Th' earth cumber'd, and the wing'd air dark't with plumes, 
The herds would over-multitude their Lords,
The Sea o'refraught would swell, & th' unsought diamonds
Would so emblaze the forhead of the Deep,
And so bestudd with Stars, that they below
Would grow inur'd to light, and com at last 
To gaze upon the Sun with shameless brows.
List Lady be not coy, and be not cosen'd
With that same vaunted name Virginity,
Beauty is nature's coyn, must not be hoorded,
But must be currant, and the good thereof 
Consists in mutual and partak'n bliss,
Unsavoury in th' injoyment of it self.
If you let slip time, like a neglected rose
It withers on the stalk with languish't head.
Beauty is natures brag, and must be shown 
In courts, at feasts, and high solemnities
Where most may wonder at the workmanship;
It is for homely features to keep home,
They had their name thence; course complexions
And cheeks of sorry grain will serve to ply 
The sampler, and to teize the huswifes wooll.
What need a vermeil-tinctur'd lip for that
Love-darting eyes, or tresses like the Morn?
There was another meaning in these gifts,
Think what, and be adviz'd, you are but young yet. 

La. I had not thought to have unlockt my lips
In this unhallow'd air, but that this Jugler
Would think to charm my judgement, as mine eyes,
Obtruding false rules pranckt in reasons garb.
I hate when vice can bolt her arguments, 
And vertue has no tongue to check her pride:
Impostor do not charge most innocent nature,
As if she would her children should be riotous
With her abundance, she good cateress
Means her provision onely to the good 
That live according to her sober laws,
And holy dictate of spare Temperance:
If every just man that now pines with want
Had but a moderate and beseeming share
Of that which lewdly-pamper'd Luxury 
Now heaps upon som few with vast excess,
Natures full blessings would be well dispenc't
In unsuperfluous eeven proportion,
And she no whit encomber'd with her store,
And then the giver would be better thank't, 
His praise due paid, for swinish gluttony
Ne're looks to Heav'n amidst his gorgeous feast,
But with besotted base ingratitude
Cramms, and blasphemes his feeder. Shall I go on?
Or have I said anough? To him that dares 
Arm his profane tongue with contemptuous words
Against the Sun-clad power of Chastity,
Fain would I somthing say, yet to what end?
Thou hast nor Eare nor Soul to apprehend
The sublime notion, and high mystery 
That must be utter'd to unfold the sage
And serious doctrine of Virginity,
And thou art worthy that thou shouldst not know
More happines then this thy present lot.
Enjoy your deer Wit, and gay Rhetorick 
That hath so well been taught her dazling fence,
Thou art not fit to hear thy self convinc't;
Yet should I try, the uncontrouled worth
Of this pure cause would kindle my rap't spirits
To such a flame of sacred vehemence, 
That dumb things would be mov'd to sympathize,
And the brute Earth would lend her nerves, and shake,
Till all thy magick structures rear'd so high,
Were shatter'd into heaps o're thy false head.

Co. She fables not, I feel that I do fear 
Her words set off by som superior power;
And though not mortal, yet a cold shuddring dew
Dips me all o're, as when the wrath of Jove
Speaks thunder, and the chains of Erebus
To som of Saturn's crew. I must dissemble, 
And try her yet more strongly. Com, no more,
This is meer moral babble, and direct
Against the canon laws of our foundation;
I must not suffer this, yet 'tis but the lees
And setlings of a melancholy blood; 
But this will cure all streight, one sip of this
Will bathe the drooping spirits in delight
Beyond the bliss of dreams. Be wise, and taste.

The Brothers rush in with Swords drawn, wrest his Glass out of his hand, and break it against the ground; his rout make signe of resistance, but are all driven in; The attendant Spirit comes in.

Spir. What, have you let the false enchanter scape?
O ye mistook, ye should have snatcht his wand 
And bound him fast; without his rod revers't,
And backward mutters of dissevering power,
We cannot free the Lady that sits here
In stony fetters fixt and motionless;
Yet stay, be not disturb'd, now I bethink me, 
Som other means I have which may be us'd,
Which once of Melibœus old I learnt
The soothest Shepherd that ere pip't on plains.

There is a gentle Nymph not farr from hence,
That with moist curb sways the smooth Severn stream, 
Sabrina is her name, a Virgin pure,
Whilom she was the daughter of Locrine,
That had the Scepter from his father Brute.
The guiltless damsell flying the mad pursuit
Of her enraged stepdam Guendolen, 
Commended her innocence to the flood
That stay'd her flight with his cross-flowing course,
The water Nymphs that in the bottom plaid,
Held up their pearled wrists and took her in,
Bearing her straight to aged Nereus Hall, 
Who piteous of her woes, rear'd her lank head,
And gave her to his daughters to imbathe
In nectar'd lavers strew'd with Asphodil,
And through the porch and inlet of each sense
Dropt in Ambrosial Oils till she reviv'd, 
And underwent a quick immortal change
Made Goddess of the River; still she retains
Her maid'n gentlenes, and oft at Eeve
Visits the herds along the twilight meadows,
Helping all urchin blasts, and ill luck signes 
That the shrewd medling Elf delights to make,
Which she with pretious viold liquors heals.
For which the Shepherds at their festivals
Carrol her goodnes loud in rustick layes,
And throw sweet garland wreaths into her stream 
Of pancies, pinks, and gaudy Daffadils.
And, as the old Swain said, she can unlock
The clasping charm, and thaw the numming spell,
If she be right invok't in warbled Song,
For maid'nhood she loves, and will be swift 
To aid a Virgin, such as was her self
In hard besetting need, this will I try
And adde the power of som adjuring verse.

SONG.

Sabrina fair
Listen where thou art sitting 
Under the glassie, cool, translucent wave,
In twisted braids of Lillies knitting
The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair,
Listen for dear honours sake,
Goddess of the silver lake, 
Listen and save.

Listen and appear to us
In name of great Oceanus,
By the earth-shaking Neptune's mace,
And Tethys grave majestick pace, 
By hoary Nereus wrincled look,
And the Carpathian wisard's hook,
By scaly Tritons winding shell,
And old sooth-saying Glaucus spell,
By Leucothea's lovely hands, 
And her son that rules the strands,
By Thetis tinsel-slipper'd feet,
And the Songs of Sirens sweet,
By dead Parthenope's dear tomb,
And fair Ligea's golden comb, 
Wherwith she sits on diamond rocks
Sleeking her soft alluring locks,
By all the Nymphs that nightly dance
Upon thy streams with wily glance,
Rise, rise, and heave thy rosie head 
From thy coral-pav'n bed,
And bridle in thy headlong wave,
Till thou our summons answer'd have.
Listen and save.

Sabrina rises, attended by water-Nymphes, and sings.

By the rushy-fringed bank, 
Where grows the Willow and the Osier dank,
My sliding Chariot stayes,
Thick set with Agat and the azurn sheen
Of Turkis blew, and Emrauld green
That in the channell strayes, 
Whilst from off the waters fleet
Thus I set my printless feet
O're the Cowslips Velvet head,
That bends not as I tread,
Gentle swain at thy request 
I am here.

Spir. Goddess dear
We implore thy powerful hand
To undoe the charmed band
Of true Virgin here distrest, 
Through the force, and through the wile
Of unblest inchanter vile.

Sab. Shepherd 'tis my office best
To help insnared chastity;
Brightest Lady look on me, 
Thus I sprinkle on thy brest
Drops that from my fountain pure,
I have kept of pretious cure,
Thrice upon thy fingers tip,
Thrice upon thy rubied lip, 
Next this marble venom'd seat
Smear'd with gumms of glutenous heat
I touch with chaste palms moist and cold,
Now the spell hath lost his hold;
And I must haste ere morning hour 
To wait in Amphitrite's bow'r.

Sabrina descends, and the Lady rises out of her seat.

Spir. Virgin, daughter of Locrine
Sprung of old Anchises line,
May thy brimmed waves for this
Their full tribute never miss 
From a thousand petty rills,
That tumble down the snowy hills:
Summer drouth, or singed air
Never scorch thy tresses fair,
Nor wet Octobers torrent flood 
Thy molten crystal fill with mudd;
May thy billows rowl ashoar
The beryl, and the golden ore,
May thy lofty head be crown'd
With many a tower and terrass round, 
And here and there thy banks upon
With Groves of myrrhe, and cinnamon.

Com Lady while Heaven lends us grace,
Let us fly this cursed place,
Lest the Sorcerer us intice 
With som other new device.
Not a waste, or needless sound
Till we com to holier ground,
I shall be your faithfull guide
Through this gloomy covert wide, 
And not many furlongs thence
Is your Fathers residence,
Where this night are met in state
Many a friend to gratulate
His wish't presence, and beside 
All the Swains that there abide,
With Jiggs, and rural dance resort,
We shall catch them at their sport,
And our sudden coming there
Will double all their mirth and chere; 
Com let us haste, the Stars grow high,
But night sits monarch yet in the mid sky.

The Scene changes presenting Ludlow Town and the Presidents Castle, then com in Countrey-Dancers, after them the attendant Spirit, with the two Brothers and the Lady.

SONG.
Spir. Back Shepherds, back, anough your play,
Till next Sun-shine holiday,
Here be without duck or nod 
Other trippings to be trod
Of lighter toes, and such Court guise
As Mercury did first devise
With the mincing Dryades
On the Lawns, and on the Leas. 

This second Song presents them to their
father and mother.

Noble Lord, and Lady bright,
I have brought ye new delight,
Here behold so goodly grown
Three fair branches of your own,
Heav'n hath timely tri'd their youth, 
Their faith, their patience, and their truth,
And sent them here through hard assays
With a crown of deathless Praise,
To triumph in victorious dance
O're sensual Folly, and Intemperance. 

The dances ended,the Spirit Epiloguizes.

Spir. To the Ocean now I fly,
And those happy climes that ly
Where day never shuts his eye,
Up in the broad fields of the sky:
There I suck the liquid ayr 
All amidst the Gardens fair
Of Hesperus, and his daughters three
That sing about the golden tree:
Along the crisped shades and bowres
Revels the spruce and jocond Spring, 
The Graces, and the rosie-boosom'd Howres,
Thither all their bounties bring,
That there eternal Summer dwels,
And West winds with musky wing
About the cedar'n alleys fling 
Nard, and Cassia's balmy smels.
Iris there with humid bow,
Waters the odorous banks that blow
Flowers of more mingled hew
Then her purfl'd scarf can shew, 
And drenches with Elysian dew
(List mortals, if your ears be true)
Beds of Hyacinth and roses
Where young Adonis oft reposes,
Waxing well of his deep wound 
In slumber soft, and on the ground
Sadly sits th' Assyrian Queen;
But far above in spangled sheen
Celestial Cupid her fam'd son advanc't,
Holds his dear Psyche sweet intranc't 
After her wandring labours long,
Till free consent the gods among
Make her his eternal Bride,
And from her fair unspotted side
Two blissful twins are to be born, 
Youth and Joy; so Jove hath sworn.

But now my task is smoothly don,
I can fly, or I can run
Quickly to the green earths end,
Where the bow'd welkin slow doth bend, 
And from thence can soar as soon
To the corners of the Moon.

Mortals that would follow me,
Love vertue, she alone is free,
She can teach ye how to clime 
Higher then the Spheary chime;
Or if Vertue feeble were,
Heav'n it self would stoop to her.
L'Allegro

Hence loathed Melancholy
Of Cerberus, and blackest midnight born,
In Stygian Cave forlorn
'Mongst horrid shapes, and shreiks, and sights unholy,
Find out som uncouth cell, 
Wher brooding darknes spreads his jealous wings,
And the night-Raven sings;
There under Ebon shades, and low-brow'd Rocks,
As ragged as thy Locks,
In dark Cimmerian desert ever dwell. 

But com thou Goddes fair and free,
In Heav'n ycleap'd Euphrosyne,
And by men, heart-easing Mirth,
Whom lovely Venus at a birth
With two sister Graces more 
To Ivy-crowned Bacchus bore;
Or whether (as som Sager sing)
The frolick Wind that breathes the Spring,
Zephir with Aurora playing,
As he met her once a Maying, 
There on Beds of Violets blew,
And fresh-blown Roses washt in dew,
Fill'd her with thee a daughter fair,
So bucksom, blith, and debonair.
Haste thee nymph, and bring with thee 
Jest and youthful Jollity,
Quips and Cranks, and wanton Wiles,
Nods, and Becks, and Wreathed Smiles,
Such as hang on Hebe's cheek,
And love to live in dimple sleek; 
Sport that wrincled Care derides,
And Laughter holding both his sides.
Com, and trip it as ye go
On the light fantastick toe,
And in thy right hand lead with thee, 
The Mountain Nymph, sweet Liberty;
And if I give thee honour due,
Mirth, admit me of thy crue
To live with her, and live with thee,
In unreproved pleasures free; 
To hear the Lark begin his flight,
And singing startle the dull night,
From his watch-towre in the skies,
Till the dappled dawn doth rise;
Then to com in spight of sorrow, 
And at my window bid good morrow,
Through the Sweet-Briar, or the Vine,
Or the twisted Eglantine.
While the Cock with lively din,
Scatters the rear of darknes thin, 
And to the stack, or the Barn dore,
Stoutly struts his Dames before,
Oft list'ning how the Hounds and horn,
Chearly rouse the slumbring morn,
From the side of som Hoar Hill, 
Through the high wood echoing shrill.
Som time walking not unseen
By Hedge-row Elms, on Hillocks green,
Right against the Eastern gate,
Wher the great Sun begins his state, 
Rob'd in flames, and Amber light,
The clouds in thousand Liveries dight.
While the Plowman neer at hand,
Whistles ore the Furrow'd Land,
And the Milkmaid singeth blithe, 
And the Mower whets his sithe,
And every Shepherd tells his tale
Under the Hawthorn in the dale.*
Streit mine eye hath caught new pleasures
Whilst the Lantskip round it measures, 
Russet Lawns, and Fallows Gray,
Where the nibling flocks do stray,
Mountains on whose barren brest
The labouring clouds do often rest:
Meadows trim with Daisies pide, 
Shallow Brooks, and Rivers wide.
Towers, and Battlements it sees
Boosom'd high in tufted Trees,
Wher perhaps som beauty lies,
The Cynosure of neighbouring eyes. 
Hard by, a Cottage chimney smokes,
From betwixt two aged Okes,
Where Corydon and Thyrsis met,
Are at their savory dinner set
Of Hearbs, and other Country Messes, 
Which the neat-handed Phillis dresses;
And then in haste her Bowre she leaves,
With Thestylis to bind the Sheaves;
Or if the earlier season lead
To the tann'd Haycock in the Mead, 
Som times with secure delight
The up-land Hamlets will invite,
When the merry Bells ring round,
And the jocond rebecks sound
To many a youth, and many a maid, 
Dancing in the Chequer'd shade;
And young and old com forth to play
On a Sunshine Holyday,
Till the live-long day-light fail,
Then to the Spicy Nut-brown Ale, 
With stories told of many a feat,
How Faery Mab the junkets eat,
She was pincht, and pull'd she sed,
And he by Friars Lanthorn led
Tells how the drudging Goblin swet 
To ern his Cream-bowle duly set,
When in one night, ere glimps of morn,
His shadowy Flale hath thresh'd the Corn
That ten day-labourers could not end,
Then lies him down the Lubbar Fend. 
And stretch'd out all the Chimney's length,
Basks at the fire his hairy strength;
And Crop-full out of dores he flings,
Ere the first Cock his Mattin rings.
Thus don the Tales, to bed they creep, 
By whispering Windes soon lull'd asleep.
Towred Cities please us then,
And the busie humm of men,
Where throngs of Knights and Barons bold,
In weeds of Peace high triumphs hold, 
With store of Ladies, whose bright eies
Rain influence, and judge the prise
Of Wit, or Arms, while both contend
To win her Grace, whom all commend.
There let Hymen oft appear 
In Saffron robe, with Taper clear,
And pomp, and feast, and revelry,
With mask, and antique Pageantry,
Such sights as youthfull Poets dream
On Summer eeves by haunted stream. 
Then to the well-trod stage anon,
If Jonsons learned Sock be on,
Or sweetest Shakespear fancies childe,
Warble his native Wood-notes wilde,
And ever against eating Cares, 
Lap me in soft Lydian Aires,
Married to immortal verse,
Such as the meeting soul may pierce
In notes, with many a winding bout
Of lincked sweetnes long drawn out, 
With wanton heed, and giddy cunning,
The melting voice through mazes running;
Untwisting all the chains that ty
The hidden soul of harmony.
That Orpheus self may heave his head 
From golden slumber on a bed
Of heapt Elysian flowres, and hear
Such streins as would have won the ear
Of Pluto, to have quite set free
His half regain'd Eurydice. 
These delights, if thou canst give,
Mirth with thee, I mean to live. 
Lycidas

In this Monody the Author bewails a
learned Friend, unfortunatly drown'd in his Passage
from Chester on the Irish Seas, 1637. And by
occasion fortels the ruine of our corrupted
Clergy then in their height.

Yet once more, O ye Laurels, and once more
Ye Myrtles brown, with Ivy never-sear,
I com to pluck your Berries harsh and crude,
And with forc'd fingers rude,
Shatter your leaves before the mellowing year. 
Bitter constraint, and sad occasion dear,
Compels me to disturb your season due:
For Lycidas is dead, dead ere his prime,
Young Lycidas, and hath not left his peer:
Who would not sing for Lycidas? he knew 
Himself to sing, and build the lofty rhyme.
He must not flote upon his watry bear
Unwept, and welter to the parching wind,
Without the meed of som melodious tear.

Begin then, Sisters of the sacred well, 
That from beneath the seat of Jove doth spring,
Begin, and somwhat loudly sweep the string.
Hence with denial vain, and coy excuse,
So may som gentle Muse
With lucky words favour my destin'd Urn, 
And as he passes turn,
And bid fair peace be to my sable shrowd.
For we were nurst upon the self-same hill,
Fed the same flock, by fountain, shade, and rill.

Together both, ere the high Lawns appear'd 
Under the opening eye-lids of the morn,
We drove a field, and both together heard
What time the Gray-fly winds her sultry horn,
Batt'ning our flocks with the fresh dews of night,
Oft till the Star that rose, at Ev'ning, bright 
Toward Heav'ns descent had slop'd his westering wheel.
Mean while the Rural ditties were not mute,
Temper'd to th' Oaten Flute,
Rough Satyrs danc'd, and Fauns with clov'n heel,
From the glad sound would not be absent long, 
And old Damœtas lov'd to hear our song.

But O the heavy change, now thou art gon,
Now thou art gon, and never must return!
Thee Shepherd, thee the Woods, and desert Caves,
With wilde Thyme and the gadding Vine o'regrown, 
And all their echoes mourn.
The Willows, and the Hazle Copses green,
Shall now no more be seen,
Fanning their joyous Leaves to thy soft layes.
As killing as the Canker to the Rose, 
Or Taint-worm to the weanling Herds that graze,
Or Frost to Flowers, that their gay wardrop wear,
When first the White thorn blows;
Such, Lycidas, thy loss to Shepherds ear.

Where were ye Nymphs when the remorseless deep 
Clos'd o're the head of your lov'd Lycidas?
For neither were ye playing on the steep,
Where your old Bards, the famous Druids ly,
Nor on the shaggy top of Mona high,
Nor yet where Deva spreads her wisard stream: 
Ay me, I fondly dream!
Had ye bin there — for what could that have don?
What could the Muse her self that Orpheus bore,
The Muse her self, for her inchanting son
Whom Universal nature did lament, 
When by the rout that made the hideous roar,
His goary visage down the stream was sent,
Down the swift Hebrus to the Lesbian shore.

Alas! What boots it with uncessant care
To tend the homely slighted Shepherds trade, 
And strictly meditate the thankles Muse,
Were it not better don as others use,
To sport with Amaryllis in the shade,
Or with the tangles of Neæra's hair?
Fame is the spur that the clear spirit doth raise 
(That last infirmity of Noble mind)
To scorn delights, and live laborious dayes;
But the fair Guerdon when we hope to find,
And think to burst out into sudden blaze,
Comes the blind Fury with th' abhorred shears, 
And slits the thin spun life. But not the praise,
Phœbus repli'd, and touch'd my trembling ears;
Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil,
Nor in the glistering foil
Set off to th' world, nor in broad rumour lies, 
But lives and spreds aloft by those pure eyes,
And perfet witnes of all judging Jove;
As he pronounces lastly on each deed,
Of so much fame in Heav'n expect thy meed.

O Fountain Arethuse, and thou honour'd flood, 
Smooth-sliding Mincius, crown'd with vocall reeds,
That strain I heard was of a higher mood:
But now my Oate proceeds,
And listens to the Herald of the Sea
That came in Neptune's plea, 
He ask'd the Waves, and ask'd the Fellon winds,
What hard mishap hath doom'd this gentle swain?
And question'd every gust of rugged wings
That blows from off each beaked Promontory,
They knew not of his story, 
And sage Hippotades their answer brings,
That not a blast was from his dungeon stray'd,
The Ayr was calm, and on the level brine,
Sleek Panope with all her sisters play'd.
It was that fatall and perfidious Bark 
Built in th' eclipse, and rigg'd with curses dark,
That sunk so low that sacred head of thine.

Next Camus, reverend Sire, went footing slow,
His Mantle hairy, and his Bonnet sedge,
Inwrought with figures dim, and on the edge 
Like to that sanguine flower inscrib'd with woe.
Ah! Who hath reft (quoth he) my dearest pledge?
Last came, and last did go,
The Pilot of the Galilean lake,
Two massy Keyes he bore of metals twain, 
(The Golden opes, the Iron shuts amain)
He shook his Miter'd locks, and stern bespake,
How well could I have spar'd for thee young swain,
Anow of such as for their bellies sake,
Creep and intrude, and climb into the fold? 
Of other care they little reck'ning make,
Then how to scramble at the shearers feast,
And shove away the worthy bidden guest.
Blind mouthes! that scarce themselves know how to hold
A Sheep-hook, or have learn'd ought els the least 
That to the faithfull Herdmans art belongs!
What recks it them? What need they? They are sped;
And when they list, their lean and flashy songs
Grate on their scrannel Pipes of wretched straw,
The hungry Sheep look up, and are not fed, 
But swoln with wind, and the rank mist they draw,
Rot inwardly, and foul contagion spread:
Besides what the grim Woolf with privy paw
Daily devours apace, and nothing sed,
But that two-handed engine at the door, 
Stands ready to smite once, and smite no more.

Return Alpheus, the dread voice is past,
That shrunk thy streams; Return Sicilian Muse,
And call the Vales, and bid them hither cast
Their Bels, and Flourets of a thousand hues. 
Ye valleys low where the milde whispers use,
Of shades and wanton winds, and gushing brooks,
On whose fresh lap the swart Star sparely looks,
Throw hither all your quaint enameld eyes,
That on the green terf suck the honied showres, 
And purple all the ground with vernal flowres.
Bring the rathe Primrose that forsaken dies.
The tufted Crow-toe, and pale Jasmine,
The white Pink, and the Pansie freakt with jeat,
The glowing Violet. 
The Musk-rose, and the well attir'd Woodbine,
With Cowslips wan that hang the pensive hed,
And every flower that sad embroidery wears:
Bid Amaranthus all his beauty shed,
And Daffadillies fill their cups with tears, 
To strew the Laureat Herse where Lycid lies.
For so to interpose a little ease,
Let our frail thoughts dally with false surmise.
Ay me! Whilst thee the shores and sounding Seas
Wash far away, where ere thy bones are hurld, 
Whether beyond the stormy Hebrides,
Where thou perhaps under the whelming tide
Visit'st the bottom of the monstrous world;
Or whether thou to our moist vows deny'd,
Sleep'st by the fable of Bellerus old, 
Where the great vision of the guarded Mount
Looks toward Namancos and Bayona's hold;
Look homeward Angel now, and melt with ruth.
And, O ye Dolphins, waft the haples youth.

Weep no more, woful Shepherds weep no more, 
For Lycidas your sorrow is not dead,
Sunk though he be beneath the watry floar,
So sinks the day-star in the Ocean bed,
And yet anon repairs his drooping head,
And tricks his beams, and with new-spangled Ore, 
Flames in the forehead of the morning sky:
So Lycidas sunk low, but mounted high,
Through the dear might of him that walk'd the waves;
Where other groves, and other streams along,
With Nectar pure his oozy Lock's he laves, 
And hears the unexpressive nuptiall Song,
In the blest Kingdoms meek of joy and love.
There entertain him all the Saints above,
In solemn troops, and sweet Societies
That sing, and singing in their glory move, 
And wipe the tears for ever from his eyes.
Now Lycidas the Shepherds weep no more;
Hence forth thou art the Genius of the shore,
In thy large recompense, and shalt be good
To all that wander in that perilous flood. 

Thus sang the uncouth Swain to th' Okes and rills,
While the still morn went out with Sandals gray,
He touch'd the tender stops of various Quills,
With eager thought warbling his Dorick lay:
And now the Sun had stretch'd out all the hills, 
And now was dropt into the Western bay;
At last he rose, and twitch'd his Mantle blew:
To morrow to fresh Woods, and Pastures new.
On the Morning of Christ's Nativity
Compos'd 1629

I

This is the Month, and this the happy morn
Wherein the Son of Heav'ns eternal King,
Of wedded Maid, and Virgin Mother born,
Our great redemption from above did bring;
For so the holy sages once did sing, 
That he our deadly forfeit should release,
And with his Father work us a perpetual peace.

II

That glorious Form, that Light unsufferable,
And that far-beaming blaze of Majesty,
Wherwith he wont at Heav'ns high Councel-Table, 
To sit the midst of Trinal Unity,
He laid aside; and here with us to be,
Forsook the Courts of everlasting Day,
And chose with us a darksom House of mortal Clay.

III

Say Heav'nly Muse, shall not thy sacred vein 
Afford a present to the Infant God?
Hast thou no vers, no hymn, or solemn strein,
To welcom him to this his new abode,
Now while the Heav'n by the Suns team untrod,
Hath took no print of the approching light, 
And all the spangled host keep watch in squadrons bright?

IV

See how from far upon the Eastern rode
The Star-led Wisards haste with odours sweet:
O run, prevent them with thy humble ode,
And lay it lowly at his blessed feet; 
Have thou the honour first, thy Lord to greet,
And joyn thy voice unto the Angel Quire,
From out his secret Altar toucht with hallow'd fire.

The Hymn

I

It was the Winter wilde,
While the Heav'n-born-childe, 
All meanly wrapt in the rude manger lies;
Nature in aw to him
Had doff't her gawdy trim,
With her great Master so to sympathize:
It was no season then for her 
To wanton with the Sun her lusty Paramour.

II

Onely with speeches fair
She woo's the gentle Air
To hide her guilty front with innocent Snow,
And on her naked shame, 
Pollute with sinfull blame,
The Saintly Vail of Maiden white to throw,
Confounded, that her Makers eyes
Should look so neer upon her foul deformities.

III

But he her fears to cease, 
Sent down the meek-eyd Peace,
She crown'd with Olive green, came softly sliding
Down through the turning sphear,
His ready Harbinger,
With Turtle wing the amorous clouds dividing, 
And waving wide her mirtle wand,
She strikes a universall Peace through Sea and Land.

IV

No War, or Battails sound
Was heard the World around:
The idle spear and shield were high up hung; 
The hooked Chariot stood
Unstain'd with hostile blood,
The Trumpet spake not to the armed throng,
And Kings sate still with awfull eye,
As if they surely knew their sovran Lord was by. 

V

But peacefull was the night
Wherin the Prince of light
His raign of peace upon the earth began:
The Windes, with wonder whist,
Smoothly the waters kist, 
Whispering new joyes to the milde Ocean,
Who now hath quite forgot to rave,
While Birds of Calm sit brooding on the charmed wave.

VI

The Stars with deep amaze
Stand fixt in stedfast gaze, 
Bending one way their pretious influence,
And will not take their flight,
For all the morning light,
Or Lucifer that often warn'd them thence;
But in their glimmering Orbs did glow, 
Untill their Lord himself bespake, and bid them go.

VII

And though the shady gloom
Had given day her room,
The Sun himself with-held his wonted speed,
And hid his head for shame, 
As his inferiour flame,
The new-enlightn'd world no more should need;
He saw a greater Sun appear
Then his bright Throne, or burning Axletree could bear.

VIII

The Shepherds on the Lawn, 
Or ere the point of dawn,
Sate simply chatting in a rustick row;
Full little thought they than,
That the mighty Pan
Was kindly com to live with them below; 
Perhaps their loves, or els their sheep,
Was all that did their silly thoughts so busie keep.

IX

When such musick sweet
Their hearts and ears did greet,
As never was by mortall finger strook, 
Divinely-warbled voice
Answering the stringed noise,
As all their souls in blisfull rapture took:
The Air such pleasure loth to lose,
With thousand echo's still prolongs each heav'nly close. 

X

Nature that heard such sound
Beneath the hollow round
Of Cynthia's seat, the Airy region thrilling,
Now was almost won
To think her part was don, 
And that her raign had here its last fulfilling;
She knew such harmony alone
Could hold all Heav'n and Earth in happier union.

XI

At last surrounds their sight
A Globe of circular light, 
That with long beams the shame-fac't night array'd,
The helmed Cherubim
And sworded Seraphim
Are seen in glittering ranks with wings displaid,
Harping in loud and solemn quire, 
With unexpressive notes to Heav'ns new-born Heir.

XII

Such Musick (as 'tis said)
Before was never made,
But when of old the sons of morning sung,
While the Creator Great 
His constellations set,
And the well-balanc't world on hinges hung,
And cast the dark foundations deep,
And bid the weltring waves their oozy channel keep.

XIII

Ring out ye Crystall sphears, 
Once bless our human ears,
(If ye have power to touch our senses so)
And let your silver chime
Move in melodious time;
And let the Base of Heav'ns deep Organ blow, 
And with your ninefold harmony
Make up full consort to th' Angelike symphony.

XIV

For if such holy Song
Enwrap our fancy long,
Time will run back, and fetch the age of gold, 
And speckl'd vanity
Will sicken soon and die,
And leprous sin will melt from earthly mould,
And Hell itself will pass away,
And leave her dolorous mansions to the peering day. 

XV

Yea Truth, and Justice then
Will down return to men,
Th' enameld Arras of the Rainbow wearing,
And Mercy set between,
Thron'd in Celestiall sheen, 
With radiant feet the tissued clouds down stearing,
And Heav'n as at som festivall,
Will open wide the Gates of her high Palace Hall.

XVI

But wisest Fate sayes no,
This must not yet be so, 
The Babe lies yet in smiling Infancy,
That on the bitter cross
Must redeem our loss;
So both himself and us to glorifie:
Yet first to those ychain'd in sleep, 
The wakefull trump of doom must thunder through the deep,

XVII

With such a horrid clang
As on mount Sinai rang
While the red fire, and smouldring clouds out brake:
The aged Earth agast 
With terrour of that blast,
Shall from the surface to the center shake,
When at the worlds last session,
The dreadfull Judge in middle Air shall spread his throne.

XVIII

And then at last our bliss 
Full and perfect is,
But now begins; for from this happy day
Th' old Dragon under ground,
In straiter limits bound,
Not half so far casts his usurped sway, 
And wrath to see his Kingdom fail,
Swindges the scaly Horrour of his foulded tail.

XIX

The Oracles are dumm,
No voice or hideous humm
Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving. 
Apollo from his shrine
Can no more divine,
With hollow shreik the steep of Delphos leaving.
No nightly trance, or breathed spell,
Inspire's the pale-ey'd Priest from the prophetic cell. 

XX

The lonely mountains o're,
And the resounding shore,
A voice of weeping heard, and loud lament;
From haunted spring and dale
Edg'd with poplar pale, 
The parting Genius is with sighing sent,
With flowre-inwov'n tresses torn
The Nimphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn.

XXI

In consecrated Earth,
And on the holy Hearth, 
The Lars, and Lemures moan with midnight plaint,
In Urns, and Altars round,
A drear, and dying sound
Affrights the Flamins at their service quaint;
And the chill Marble seems to sweat, 
While each peculiar power forgoes his wonted seat.

XXII

Peor, and Baalim,
Forsake their Temples dim,
With that twise-batter'd god of Palestine,
And mooned Ashtaroth, 
Heav'ns Queen and Mother both,
Now sits not girt with Tapers holy shine,
The Libyc Hammon shrinks his horn,
In vain the Tyrian Maids their wounded Thamuz mourn.

XXIII

And sullen Moloch fled, 
Hath left in shadows dred.
His burning Idol all of blackest hue,
In vain with Cymbals ring,
They call the grisly king,
In dismall dance about the furnace blue; 
The brutish gods of Nile as fast,
Isis and Orus, and the Dog Anubis hast.

XXIV

Nor is Osiris seen
In Memphian Grove, or Green,
Trampling the unshowr'd Grasse with lowings loud: 
Nor can he be at rest
Within his sacred chest,
Naught but profoundest Hell can be his shroud:
In vain with Timbrel'd Anthems dark
The sable-stoled Sorcerers bear his worshipt Ark. 

XXV

He feels from Juda's land
The dredded Infants hand,
The rayes of Bethlehem blind his dusky eyn;
Nor all the gods beside,
Longer dare abide, 
Nor Typhon huge ending in snaky twine:
Our Babe, to shew his Godhead true,
Can in his swadling bands controul the damned crew.

XXVI

So when the Sun in bed,
Curtain'd with cloudy red, 
Pillows his chin upon an Orient wave.
The flocking shadows pale
Troop to th' infernall jail,
Each fetter'd Ghost slips to his severall grave,
And the yellow-skirted Fayes 
Fly after the Night-steeds, leaving their Moon-lov'd maze.

XXVII

But see the Virgin blest,
Hath laid her Babe to rest.
Time is our tedious Song should here have ending,
Heav'ns youngest-teemed Star 
Hath fixt her polisht Car,
Her sleeping Lord with Handmaid Lamp attending.
And all about the Courtly Stable,
Bright-harnest Angels sit in order serviceable. 
Il Penseroso

HEnce vain deluding joyes,
The brood of folly without father bred,
How little you bested,
Or fill the fixed mind with all your toyes;
Dwell in som idle brain, 
And fancies fond with gaudy shapes possess,
As thick and numberless
As the gay motes that people the Sun Beams,
Or likest hovering dreams
The fickle Pensioners of Morpheus train. 

But hail thou Goddes, sage and holy,
Hail divinest Melancholy,
Whose Saintly visage is too bright
To hit the Sense of human sight;
And therfore to our weaker view, 
Ore laid with black staid Wisdoms hue.
Black, but such as in esteem,
Prince Memnons sister might beseem,
Or that Starr'd Ethiope Queen that strove
To set her beauties praise above 
The Sea Nymphs, and their powers offended.
Yet thou art higher far descended,
Thee bright- hair'd Vesta long of yore,
To solitary Saturn bore;
His daughter she (in Saturns raign, 
Such mixture was not held a stain).
Oft in glimmering Bowres, and glades
He met her, and in secret shades
Of woody Ida's inmost grove,
While yet there was no fear of Jove. 
Com pensive Nun, devout and pure,
Sober, stedfast, and demure,
All in a robe of darkest grain,
Flowing with majestick train,
And sable stole of Cipres Lawn, 
Over thy decent shoulders drawn.
Com, but keep thy wonted state,
With eev'n step, and musing gate,
And looks commercing with the skies,
Thy rapt soul sitting in thine eyes: 
There held in holy passion still,
Forget thy self to Marble, till
With a sad Leaden downward cast,
Thou fix them on the earth as fast.
And joyn with thee calm Peace, and Quiet, 
Spare Fast, that oft with gods doth diet,
And hears the Muses in a ring,
Ay round about Joves Altar sing.
And adde to these retired leasure,
That in trim Gardens takes his pleasure; 
But first, and chiefest, with thee bring,
Him that yon soars on golden wing,
Guiding the fiery-wheeled throne,
The Cherub Contemplation,
And the mute Silence hist along, 
'Less Philomel will daign a Song,
In her sweetest, saddest plight,
Smoothing the rugged brow of night,
While Cynthia checks her Dragon yoke,
Gently o're th' accustom'd Oke; 
Sweet Bird that shunn'st the noise of folly,
Most musicall, most melancholy!
Thee Chauntress oft the Woods among,
I woo to hear thy eeven-Song;
And missing thee, I walk unseen 
On the dry smooth-shaven Green,
To behold the wandring Moon,
Riding neer her highest noon,
Like one that had bin led astray
Through the Heav'ns wide pathles way; 
And oft, as if her head she bow'd,
Stooping through a fleecy cloud.
Oft on a Plat of rising ground,
I hear the far-off Curfeu sound,
Over som wide-water'd shoar, 
Swinging slow with sullen roar;
Or if the Ayr will not permit,
Som still removed place will fit,
Where glowing Embers through the room
Teach light to counterfeit a gloom, 
Far from all resort of mirth,
Save the Cricket on the hearth,
Or the Belmans drousie charm,
To bless the dores from nightly harm:
Or let my Lamp at midnight hour, 
Be seen in som high lonely Towr,
Where I may oft out-watch the Bear,
With thrice great Hermes, or unsphear
The spirit of Plato to unfold
What Worlds, or what vast Regions hold 
The immortal mind that hath forsook
Her mansion in this fleshly nook:
And of those Dæmons that are found
In fire, air, flood, or under ground,
Whose power hath a true consent 
With Planet, or with Element.
Som time let Gorgeous Tragedy
In Scepter'd Pall com sweeping by,
Presenting Thebs, or Pelops line,
Or the tale of Troy divine. 
Or what (though rare) of later age,
Ennobled hath the Buskind stage.
But, O sad Virgin, that thy power
Might raise Musæus from his bower,
Or bid the soul of Orpheus sing 
Such notes as warbled to the string,
Drew Iron tears down Pluto's cheek,
And made Hell grant what Love did seek.
Or call up him that left half told
The story of Cambuscan bold, 
Of Camball, and of Algarsife,
And who had Canace to wife,
That own'd the vertuous Ring and Glass,
And of the wondrous Hors of Brass,
On which the Tartar King did ride; 
And if ought els, great Bards beside,
In sage and solemn tunes have sung,
Of Turneys and of Trophies hung;
Of Forests, and inchantments drear,
Where more is meant then meets the ear. 
Thus night oft see me in thy pale career,
Till civil-suited Morn appeer,
Not trickt and frounc't as she was wont,
With the Attick Boy to hunt,
But Cherchef't in a comly Cloud, 
While rocking Winds are Piping loud,
Or usher'd with a shower still,
When the gust hath blown his fill,
Ending on the russling Leaves,
With minute drops from off the Eaves. 
And when the Sun begins to fling
His flaring beams, me Goddes bring
To arched walks of twilight groves,
And shadows brown that Sylvan loves
Of Pine, or monumental Oake, 
Where the rude Ax with heaved stroke,
Was never heard the Nymphs to daunt,
Or fright them from their hallow'd haunt.
There in close covert by som Brook,
Where no profaner eye may look, 
Hide me from Day's garish eie,
While the Bee with Honied thie,
That at her flowry work doth sing,
And the Waters murmuring
With such consort as they keep, 
Entice the dewy-feather'd Sleep;
And let som strange mysterious dream,
Wave at his Wings in Airy stream,
Of lively portrature display'd,
Softly on my eye-lids laid. 
And as I wake, sweet musick breath
Above, about, or underneath,
Sent by som spirit to mortals good,
Or th' unseen Genius of the Wood.
But let my due feet never fail, 
To walk the studious Cloysters pale,
And love the high embowed Roof,
With antick Pillars massy proof,
And storied Windows richly dight,
Casting a dimm religious light. 
There let the pealing Organ blow,
To the full voic'd Quire below,
In Service high, and Anthems cleer,
As may with sweetnes, through mine ear,
Dissolve me into extasies, 
And bring all Heav'n before mine eyes.
And may at last my weary age
Find out the peacefull hermitage,
The Hairy Gown and Mossy Cell,
Where I may sit and rightly spell, 
Of every Star that Heav'n doth shew,
And every Herb that sips the dew;
Till old experience do attain
To somthing like Prophetic strain.
These pleasures Melancholy give, 
And I with thee will choose to live. 
AREOPAGITICA;

A SPEECH OF

Mr. JOHN MILTON For the Liberty of UNLICENC'D PRINTING, To the PARLAMENT of
ENGLAND.

    This is true Liberty when free born men Having to advise the public may
    speak free, Which he who can, and will, deserv's high praise, Who neither
    can nor will, may hold his peace; What can be juster in a State then this?

Eurip. Hicetid.

For the Liberty of unlicenc'd Printing.

They who to States and Governours of the Commonwealth direct their Speech, High
Court of Parlament, or wanting such accesse in a private condition, write that
which they foresee may advance the publick good; I suppose them as at the
beginning of no meane endeavour, not a little alter'd and mov'd inwardly in
their mindes: Some with doubt of what will be the successe, others with fear of
what will be the censure; some with hope, others with confidence of what they
have to speake. And me perhaps each of these dispositions, as the subject was
whereon I enter'd, may have at other times variously affected; and likely might
in these formost expressions now also disclose which of them sway'd most, but
that the very attempt of this addresse thus made, and the thought of whom it
hath recourse to, hath got the power within me to a passion, farre more welcome
then incidentall to a Preface. Which though I stay not to confesse ere any
aske, I shall be blamelesse, if it be no other, then the joy and gratulation
which it brings to all who wish and promote their Countries liberty; whereof
this whole Discourse propos'd will be a certaine testimony, if not a Trophey.
For this is not the liberty which wee can hope, that no grievance ever should
arise in the Commonwealth, that let no man in this World expect; but when
complaints are freely heard, deeply consider'd and speedily reform'd, then is
the utmost bound of civill liberty attain'd, that wise men looke for. To which
if I now manifest by the very sound of this which I shall utter, that wee are
already in good part arriv'd, and yet from such a steepe disadvantage of
tyranny and superstition grounded into our principles as was beyond the manhood
of a Roman recovery, it will bee attributed first, as is most due, to the
strong assistance of God our deliverer, next to your faithfull guidance and
undaunted Wisdome, Lords and Commons of England. Neither is it in Gods esteeme
the diminution of his glory, when honourable things are spoken of good men and
worthy Magistrates; which if I now first should begin to doe, after so fair
a progresse of your laudable deeds, and such a long obligement upon the whole
Realme to your indefatigable virtues, I might be justly reckn'd among the
tardiest, and the unwillingest of them that praise yee. Nevertheless there
being three principall things, without which all praising is but Courtship and
flattery, First, when that only is prais'd which is solidly worth praise: next,
when greatest likelihoods are brought that such things are truly and really in
those persons to whom they are ascrib'd, the other, when he who praises, by
shewing that such his actuall perswasion is of whom he writes, can demonstrate
that he flatters not; the former two of these I have heretofore endeavour'd,
rescuing the employment from him who went about to impaire your merits with
a triviall and malignant Encomium; the latter as belonging chiefly to mine owne
acquittall, that whom I so extoll'd I did not flatter, hath been reserv'd
opportunely to this occasion. For he who freely magnifies what hath been nobly
done, and fears not to declare as freely what might be done better, gives ye
the best cov'nant of his fidelity; and that his loyalest affection and his hope
waits on your proceedings. His highest praising is not flattery, and his
plainest advice is a kinde of praising; for though I should affirme and hold by
argument, that it would fare better with truth, with learning, and the
Commonwealth, if one of your publisht Orders which I should name, were call'd
in, yet at the same time it could not but much redound to the lustre of your
milde and equall Government, when as private persons are hereby animated to
thinke ye better pleas'd with publick advice, then other statists have been
delighted heretofore with publicke flattery. And men will then see what
difference there is between the magnanimity of a trienniall Parlament, and that
jealous hautinesse of Prelates and cabin Counsellours that usurpt of late, when
as they shall observe yee in the midd'st of your Victories and successes more
gently brooking writt'n exceptions against a voted Order, then other Courts,
which had produc't nothing worth memory but the weake ostentation of wealth,
would have endur'd the least signifi'd dislike at any sudden Proclamation. If
I should thus farre presume upon the meek demeanour of your civill and gentle
greatnesse, Lords and Commons, as what your publisht Order hath directly said,
that to gainsay, I might defend my selfe with ease, if any should accuse me of
being new or insolent, did they but know how much better I find ye esteem it to
imitate the old and elegant humanity of Greece, then the barbarick pride of
a Hunnish and Norwegian statelines. And out of those ages, to whose polite
wisdom and letters we ow that we are not yet Gothes and Jutlanders, I could
name him who from his private house wrote that discourse to the Parlament of
Athens, that perswades them to change the forme of Democraty which was then
establisht. Such honour was done in those dayes to men who profest the study of
wisdome and eloquence, not only in their own Country, but in other Lands, that
Cities and Siniories heard them gladly, and with great respect, if they had
aught in publick to admonish the State. Thus did Dion Prusæus, a stranger and
a privat Orator counsell the Rhodians against a former Edict: and I abound with
other like examples, which to set heer would be superfluous. But if from the
industry of a life wholly dedicated to studious labours, and those naturall
endowments haply not the worst for two and fifty degrees of northern latitude,
so much must be derogated, as to count me not equall to any of those who had
this priviledge, I would obtain to be thought not so inferior, as your selves
are superior to the most of them who receiv'd their counsell: and how farre you
excell them, be assur'd, Lords and Commons, there can no greater testimony
appear, then when your prudent spirit acknowledges and obeyes the voice of
reason from what quarter soever it be heard speaking; and renders ye as willing
to repeal any Act of your own setting forth, as any set forth by your
Predecessors.

If ye be thus resolv'd, as it were injury to think ye were not; I know not what
should withhold me from presenting ye with fit instance wherein to shew both
that love of truth which ye eminently professe, and that uprightnesse of your
judgement which is not wont to be partiall to your selves; by judging over
again that Order which ye have ordain'd to regulate Printing, That no Book,
pamphlet, or paper shall be henceforth Printed, unlesse the same be first
approv'd and licenc't by such, or at least one of such as shall be thereto
appointed. For that part which preserves justly every mans Copy to himselfe, or
provides for the poor, I touch not, only wish they be not made pretenses to
abuse and persecute honest and painfull Men, who offend not in either of these
particulars. But that other clause of Licencing Books, which we thought had
dy'd with his brother quadragesimal and matrimonial when the Prelats expir'd,
I shall now attend with such a Homily, as shall lay before ye, first the
inventors of it to bee those whom ye will be loath to own; next what is to be
thought in generall of reading, what ever sort the Books be; and that this
Order avails nothing to the suppressing of scandalous, seditious, and libellous
Books, which were mainly intended to be supprest. Last, that it will be primely
to the discouragement of all learning, and the stop of Truth, not only by
disexercising and blunting our abilities in what we know already, but by
hindring and cropping the discovery that might bee yet further made both in
religious and civill Wisdome.

I deny not, but that it is of greatest concernment in the Church and
Commonwealth, to have a vigilant eye how Bookes demeane themselves as well as
men; and thereafter to confine, imprison, and do sharpest justice on them as
malefactors: For Books are not absolutely dead things, but doe contain
a potencie of life in them to be as active as that soule was whose progeny they
are; nay they do preserve as in a violl the purest efficacie and extraction of
that living intellect that bred them. I know they are as lively, and as
vigorously productive, as those fabulous Dragons teeth; and being sown up and
down, may chance to spring up armed men. And yet on the other hand, unlesse
warinesse be us'd, as good almost kill a Man as kill a good Book; who kills
a Man kills a reasonable creature, Gods Image; but hee who destroyes a good
Booke, kills reason it selfe, kills the Image of God, as it were in the eye.
Many a man lives a burden to the Earth; but a good Booke is the pretious
life-blood of a master spirit, imbalm'd and treasur'd up on purpose to a life
beyond life. 'Tis true, no age can restore a life, whereof perhaps there is no
great losse; and revolutions of ages do not oft recover the losse of a rejected
truth, for the want of which whole Nations fare the worse. We should be wary
therefore what persecution we raise against the living labours of publick men,
how we spill that season'd life of man preserv'd and stor'd up in Books; since
we see a kinde of homicide may be thus committed, sometimes a martyrdome, and
if it extend to the whole impression, a kinde of massacre, whereof the
execution ends not in the slaying of an elementall life, but strikes at that
ethereall and fift essence, the breath of reason it selfe, slaies an
immortality rather then a life. But lest I should be condemn'd of introducing
licence, while I oppose Licencing, I refuse not the paines to be so much
Historicall, as will serve to shew what hath been done by ancient and famous
Commonwealths, against this disorder, till the very time that this project of
licencing crept out of the Inquisition, was catcht up by our Prelates, and hath
caught some of our Presbyters.

In Athens where Books and Wits were ever busier then in any other part of
Greece, I finde but only two sorts of writings which the Magistrate car'd to
take notice of; those either blasphemous and Atheisticall, or Libellous. Thus
the Books of Protagoras were by the Iudges of Areopagus commanded to be burnt,
and himselfe banisht the territory for a discourse begun with his confessing
not to know whether there were gods, or whether not: And against defaming, it
was decreed that none should be traduc'd by name, as was the manner of Vetus
Comœdia, whereby we may guesse how they censur'd libelling: And this course was
quick enough, as Cicero writes, to quell both the desperate wits of other
Atheists, and the open way of defaming, as the event shew'd. Of other sects and
opinions, though tending to voluptuousnesse, and the denying of divine
providence, they tooke no heed. Therefore we do not read that either Epicurus,
or that libertine school of Cyrene, or what the Cynick impudence utter'd, was
ever question'd by the Laws. Neither is it recorded that the writings of those
old Comedians were suppresst, though the acting of them were forbid; and that
Plato commended the reading of Aristophanes, the loosest of them all, to his
royall scholler Dionysius, is commonly known, and may be excus'd, if holy
Chrysostome, as is reported, nightly studied so much the same Author and had
the art to cleanse a scurrilous vehemence into the stile of a rousing Sermon.
That other leading city of Greece, Lacedæmon, considering that Lycurgus their
Law-giver was so addicted to elegant learning, as to have been the first that
brought out of Ionia the scatter'd workes of Homer, and sent the poet Thales
from Creet to prepare and mollifie the Spartan surlinesse with his smooth songs
and odes, the better to plant among them law and civility, it is to be wonder'd
how muselesse and unbookish they were, minding nought but the feats of Warre.
There needed no licencing of Books among them for they dislik'd all, but their
owne Laconick Apothegms, and took a slight occasion to chase Archilochus out of
their City, perhaps for composing in a higher straine then their own souldierly
ballats and roundels could reach to: Or if it were for his broad verses, they
were not therein so cautious, but they were as dissolute in their promiscuous
conversing; whence Euripides affirmes in Andromache, that their women were all
unchaste. Thus much may give us light after what sort Bookes were prohibited
among the Greeks. The Romans also for many ages train'd up only to a military
roughnes, resembling most the Lacedæmonian guise, knew of learning little but
what their twelve Tables, and the Pontifick College with their Augurs and
Flamins taught them in Religion and Law, so unacquainted with other learning,
that when Carneades and Critolaus, with the Stoick Diogenes comming Embassadors
to Rome, tooke thereby occasion to give the City a tast of their Philosophy,
they were suspected for seducers by no lesse a man then Cato the Censor, who
mov'd it in the Senat to dismisse them speedily, and to banish all such Attick
bablers out of Italy. But Scipio and others of the noblest Senators withstood
him and his old Sabin austerity; honour'd and admir'd the men; and the Censor
himself at last in his old age fell to the study of that whereof before hee was
so scrupulous. And yet at the same time Nævius and Plautus the first Latine
comedians had fill'd the City with all the borrow'd Scenes of Menander and
Philemon. Then began to be consider'd there also what was to be don to
libellous books and Authors; for Nævius was quickly cast into prison for his
unbridl'd pen, and releas'd by the Tribunes upon his recantation: We read also
that libels were burnt, and the makers punisht by Augustus. The like severity
no doubt was us'd if ought were impiously writt'n against their esteemed gods.
Except in these two points, how the world went in Books, the Magistrat kept no
reckning. And therefore Lucretius without impeachment versifies his Epicurism
to Memmius, and had the honour to be set forth the second time by Cicero so
great a father of the Commonwealth; although himselfe disputes against that
opinion in his own writings. Nor was the Satyricall sharpnesse, or naked
plainnes of Lucilius, or Catullus, or Flaccus, by any order prohibited. And for
matters of State, the story of Titus Livius, though it extoll'd that part which
Pompey held, was not therefore suppresst by Octavius Cæsar of the other
Faction. But that Naso was by him banisht in his old age, for the wanton Poems
of his youth, was but a meer covert of State over some secret cause: and
besides, the Books were neither banisht nor call'd in. From hence we shall meet
with little else but tyranny in the Roman Empire, that we may not marvell, if
not so often bad, as good Books were silenc't. I shall therefore deem to have
bin large anough in producing what among the ancients was punishable to write,
save only which, all other arguments were free to treat on.

By this time the Emperors were become Christians, whose discipline in this
point I doe not finde to have bin more severe then what was formerly in
practice. The Books of those whom they took to be grand Hereticks were
examin'd, refuted, and condemn'd in the general Councels; and not till then
were prohibited, or burnt by autority of the Emperor. As for the writings of
Heathen authors, unlesse they were plaine invectives against Christianity, as
those of Porphyrius and Proclus, they met with no interdict that can be cited,
till about the year 400. in a Carthaginian Councel, wherein Bishops themselves
were forbid to read the Books of Gentiles, but Heresies they might read: while
others long before them on the contrary scrupl'd more the Books of Hereticks,
then of Gentiles. And that the primitive Councels and Bishops were wont only to
declare what Books were not commendable, passing no furder, but leaving it to
each ones conscience to read or to lay by, till after the yeare 800. is
observ'd already by Padre Paolo the great unmasker of the Trentine Councel.
After which time the Popes of Rome, engrossing what they pleas'd of Politicall
rule into their owne hands, extended their dominion over mens eyes, as they had
before over their judgements, burning and prohibiting to be read, what they
fancied not; yet sparing in their censures, and the Books not many which they
so dealt with: till Martin the 5. by his Bull not only prohibited, but was the
first that excommunicated the reading of hereticall Books; for about that time
Wicklef and Husse growing terrible, were they who first drove the Papall Court
to a stricter policy of prohibiting. Which cours Leo the 10, and his successors
follow'd, untill the Councell of Trent, and the Spanish Inquisition engendring
together brought forth, or perfeted those Catalogues, and expurging Indexes
that rake through the entralls of many an old good Author, with a violation
wors then any could be offer'd to his tomb. Nor did they stay in matters
Hereticall, but any subject that was not to their palat, they either condemn'd
in a prohibition, or had it strait into the new Purgatory of an Index. To fill
up the measure of encroachment, their last invention was to ordain that no
Book, pamphlet, or paper should be Printed (as if St. Peter had bequeath'd them
the keys of the Presse also out of Paradise) unlesse it were approv'd and
licenc't under the hands of 2 or 3 glutton Friers. For example:

    Let the Chancellor Cini be pleas'd to see if in this present work be
    contain'd ought that may withstand the Printing. 

Vincent Rabbatta, Vicar of Florence.

    I have seen this present work, and finde nothing athwart the Catholick
    faith and good manners: in witness whereof I have given, &c. 

Nicolò Cini, Chancellor of Florence.

    Attending the precedent relation, it is allow'd that this present work of
    Davanzati may be printed. 

Vincent Rabbatta, &c.

    It may be printed, July 15. 

Friar Simon Mompei d'Amelia, Chancellor of the holy office in Florence.

Sure they have a conceit, if he of the bottomlesse pit had not long since broke
prison, that this quadruple exorcism would barre him down. I fear their next
designe will be to get into their custody the licensing of that which they say
Claudius intended, but went not through with. Voutsafe to see another of their
forms the Roman stamp:

    Imprimatur, If it seem good to the reverend Master of the holy Palace.

Belcastro Vicegerent.

    Imprimatur 

Friar Nicolò Rodolphi, Master of the holy Palace.

Sometimes 5 Imprimaturs are seen together dialogue-wise in the Piatza of one
Title page, complementing and ducking each to other with their shav'n
reverences, whether the Author, who stands by in perplexity at the foot of his
Epistle, shall to the Presse or to the spunge. These are the prety
responsories, these are the dear Antiphonies, that so bewitcht of late our
Prelats, and their Chaplaines with the goodly Eccho they made; and besotted us
to the gay imitation of a lordly Imprimatur, one from Lambeth house, another
from the West end of Pauls; so apishly Romanizing, that the word of command
still was set downe in Latine; as if the learned Grammaticall pen that wrote
it, would cast no ink without Latine: or perhaps, as they thought, because no
vulgar tongue was worthy to expresse the pure conceit of an Imprimatur; but
rather, as I hope, for that our English, the language of men ever famous, and
formost in the atchievements of liberty, will not easily finde servile letters
anow to spell such a dictatorie presumption in English. And thus ye have the
Inventors and the originall of Book-licencing ript up and drawn as lineally as
any pedigree. We have it not, that can be heard of, from any ancient State, or
politie, or Church, nor by any Statute left us by our Ancestors elder or later;
nor from the moderne custom of any reformed Citty, or Church abroad; but from
the most Antichristian Councel and the most tyrannous Inquisition that ever
inquir'd. Till then Books were ever as freely admitted into the World as any
other birth; the issue of the brain was no more stifl'd then the issue of the
womb: no envious Juno sate cros-leg'd over the nativity of any mans
intellectuall off spring; but if it prov'd a Monster, who denies, but that it
was justly burnt, or sunk into the Sea. But that a Book in wors condition then
a peccant soul, should be to stand before a Jury ere it be borne to the World,
and undergo yet in darknesse the judgement of Radamanth and his Collegues, ere
it can pass the ferry backward into light, was never heard before, till that
mysterious iniquity, provokt and troubl'd at the first entrance of Reformation,
sought out new limbo's and new hells wherein they might include our Books also
within the number of their damned. And this was the rare morsell so officiously
snatcht up, and so ilfavourdly imitated by our inquisiturient Bishops, and the
attendant minorites their Chaplains. That ye like not now these most certain
Authors of this licencing order, and that all sinister intention was farre
distant from your thoughts, when ye were importun'd the passing it, all men who
know the integrity of your actions, and how ye honour Truth, will clear yee
readily.

But some will say, What though the inventors were bad, the thing for all that
may be good? It may be so; yet if that thing be no such deep invention, but
obvious, and easie for any man to light on, and yet best and wisest
Commonwealths through all ages, and occasions have foreborne to use it, and
falsest seducers, and oppressors of men were the first who tooke it up, and to
no other purpose but to obstruct and hinder the first approach of Reformation;
I am of those who beleeve, it will be a harder alchymy then Lullius ever knew,
to sublimat any good use out of such an invention. Yet this only is what
I request to gain from this reason, that it may be held a dangerous and
suspicious fruit, as certainly it deserves, for the tree that bore it, untill
I can dissect one by one the properties it has. But I have first to finish, as
was propounded, what is to be thought in generall of reading Books, what ever
sort they be, and whether be more the benefit, or the harm that thence
proceeds?

Not to insist upon the examples of Moses, Daniel, & Paul, who were skilfull in
all the learning of the Ægyptians, Caldeans, and Greeks, which could not
probably be without reading their Books of all sorts; in Paul especially, who
thought it no defilement to insert into holy Scripture the sentences of three
Greek Poets, and one of them a Tragedian, the question was, notwithstanding
sometimes controverted among the Primitive Doctors, but with great odds on that
side which affirm'd it both lawfull and profitable, as was then evidently
perceiv'd, when Julian the Apostat, and suttlest enemy to our faith, made
a decree forbidding Christians the study of heathen learning: for, said he,
they wound us with our own weapons, and with our owne arts and sciences they
overcome us. And indeed the Christians were put so to their shifts by this
crafty means, and so much in danger to decline into all ignorance, that the two
Apollinarii were fain as a man may say, to coin all the seven liberall Sciences
out of the Bible, reducing it into divers forms of Orations, Poems, Dialogues,
ev'n to the calculating of a new Christian grammar. But, saith the Historian
Socrates, The providence of God provided better then the industry of
Apollinarius and his son, by taking away that illiterat law with the life of
him who devis'd it. So great an injury they then held it to be depriv'd of
Hellenick learning; and thought it a persecution more undermining, and secretly
decaying the Church, then the open cruelty of Decius or Dioclesian. And perhaps
it was the same politick drift that the Divell whipt St. Jerom in a lenten
dream, for reading Cicero; or else it was a fantasm bred by the feaver which
had then seis'd him. For had an Angel bin his discipliner, unlesse it were for
dwelling too much upon Ciceronianisms, & had chastiz'd the reading, not the
vanity, it had bin plainly partiall; first to correct him for grave Cicero, and
not for scurrill Plautus, whom he confesses to have bin reading not long
before; next to correct him only, and let so many more ancient Fathers wax old
in those pleasant and florid studies without the lash of such a tutoring
apparition; insomuch that Basil teaches how some good use may be made of
Margites, a sportfull Poem, not now extant, writ by Homer; and why not then of
Morgante, an Italian Romanze much to the same purpose. But if it be agreed we
shall be try'd by visions, there is a vision recorded by Eusebius far ancienter
then this tale of Jerom to the Nun Eustochium, and besides has nothing of
a feavor in it. Dionysius Alexandrinus was about the year 240, a person of
great name in the Church for piety and learning, who had wont to avail himself
much against hereticks by being conversant in their Books; untill a certain
Presbyter laid it scrupulously to his conscience, how he durst venture himselfe
among those defiling volumes. The worthy man loath to give offence fell into
a new debate with himselfe what was to be thought; when suddenly a vision sent
from God, it is his own Epistle that so averrs it, confirm'd him in these
words: Read any books what ever come to thy hands, for thou art sufficient both
to judge aright, and to examine each matter. To this revelation he assented the
sooner, as he confesses, because it was answerable to that of the Apostle to
the Thessalonians, Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. And he might
have added another remarkable saying of the same Author; To the pure, all
things are pure, not only meats and drinks, but all kinde of knowledge whether
of good or evill; the knowledge cannot defile, nor consequently the books, if
the will and conscience be not defil'd. For books are as meats and viands are;
some of good, some of evill substance; and yet God in that unapocryphall
vision, said without exception, Rise Peter, kill and eat, leaving the choice to
each mans discretion. Wholesome meats to a vitiated stomack differ little or
nothing from unwholesome; and best books to a naughty mind are not unappliable
to occasions of evill. Bad meats will scarce breed good nourishment in the
healthiest concoction; but herein the difference is of bad books, that they to
a discreet and judicious Reader serve in many respects to discover, to confute,
to forewarn, and to illustrate. Wherof what better witnes can ye expect
I should produce, then one of your own now sitting in Parlament, the chief of
learned men reputed in this land, Mr. Selden, whose volume of naturall
& national laws proves, not only by great autorities brought together, but by
exquisite reasons and theorems almost mathematically demonstrative, that all
opinions, yea errors, known, read, and collated, are of main service
& assistance toward the speedy attainment of what is truest. I conceive
therefore, that when God did enlarge the universall diet of mans body, saving
ever the rules of temperance, he then also, as before, left arbitrary the
dyeting and repasting of our minds; as wherein every mature man might have to
exercise his owne leading capacity. How great a vertue is temperance, how much
of moment through the whole life of man? yet God committs the managing so great
a trust, without particular Law or prescription, wholly to the demeanour of
every grown man. And therefore when he himself tabl'd the Jews from heaven,
that Omer which was every mans daily portion of Manna, is computed to have bin
more then might have well suffic'd the heartiest feeder thrice as many meals.
For those actions which enter into a man, rather then issue out of him, and
therefore defile not, God uses not to captivat under a perpetuall childhood of
prescription, but trusts him with the gift of reason to be his own chooser;
there were but little work left for preaching, if law and compulsion should
grow so fast upon those things which hertofore were govern'd only by
exhortation. Salomon informs us that much reading is a wearines to the flesh;
but neither he, nor other inspir'd author tells us that such, or such reading
is unlawfull: yet certainly had God thought good to limit us herein, it had bin
much more expedient to have told us what was unlawfull, then what was
wearisome. As for the burning of those Ephesian books by St. Pauls converts,
tis reply'd the books were magick, the Syriack so renders them. It was a privat
act, a voluntary act, and leaves us to a voluntary imitation: the men in
remorse burnt those books which were their own; the Magistrat by this example
is not appointed; these men practiz'd the books, another might perhaps have
read them in some sort usefully. Good and evill we know in the field of this
World grow up together almost inseparably; and the knowledge of good is so
involv'd and interwoven with the knowledge of evill, and in so many cunning
resemblances hardly to be discern'd, that those confused seeds which were
impos'd on Psyche as an incessant labour to cull out, and sort asunder, were
not more intermixt. It was from out the rinde of one apple tasted, that the
knowledge of good and evill as two twins cleaving together leapt forth into the
World. And perhaps this is that doom which Adam fell into of knowing good and
evill, that is to say of knowing good by evill. As therefore the state of man
now is; what wisdome can there be to choose, what continence to forbeare
without the knowledge of evill? He that can apprehend and consider vice with
all her baits and seeming pleasures, and yet abstain, and yet distinguish, and
yet prefer that which is truly better, he is the true wayfaring Christian.
I cannot praise a fugitive and cloister'd vertue, unexercis'd & unbreath'd,
that never sallies out and sees her adversary, but slinks out of the race,
where that immortall garland is to be run for, not without dust and heat.
Assuredly we bring not innocence into the world, we bring impurity much rather:
that which purifies us is triall, and triall is by what is contrary. That
vertue therefore which is but a youngling in the contemplation of evill, and
knows not the utmost that vice promises to her followers, and rejects it, is
but a blank vertue, not a pure; her whitenesse is but an excrementall
whitenesse; Which was the reason why our sage and serious Poet Spencer, whom
I dare be known to think a better teacher then Scotus or Aquinas, describing
true temperance under the person of Guion, brings him in with his palmer
through the cave of Mammon, and the bowr of earthly blisse that he might see
and know, and yet abstain. Since therefore the knowledge and survay of vice is
in this world so necessary to the constituting of human vertue, and the
scanning of error to the confirmation of truth, how can we more safely, and
with lesse danger scout into the regions of sin and falsity then by reading all
manner of tractats, and hearing all manner of reason? And this is the benefit
which may be had of books promiscuously read. But of the harm that may result
hence three kinds are usually reckn'd. First, is fear'd the infection that may
spread; but then all human learning and controversie in religious points must
remove out of the world, yea the Bible it selfe; for that oftimes relates
blasphemy not nicely, it describes the carnall sense of wicked men not
unelegantly, it brings in holiest men passionately murmuring against providence
through all the arguments of Epicurus: in other great disputes it answers
dubiously and darkly to the common reader: And ask a Talmudist what ails the
modesty of his marginal Keri, that Moses and all the Prophets cannot perswade
him to pronounce the textuall Chetiv. For these causes we all know the Bible it
selfe put by the Papist into the first rank of prohibited books. The ancientest
Fathers must be next remov'd, as Clement of Alexandria, and that Eusebian book
of Evangelick preparation, transmitting our ears through a hoard of heathenish
obscenities to receive the Gospel. Who finds not that Irenæus, Epiphanius,
Jerom, and others discover more heresies then they well confute, and that oft
for heresie which is the truer opinion. Nor boots it to say for these, and all
the heathen Writers of greatest infection, if it must be thought so, with whom
is bound up the life of human learning, that they writ in an unknown tongue, so
long as we are sure those languages are known as well to the worst of men, who
are both most able, and most diligent to instill the poison they suck, first
into the Courts of Princes, acquainting them with the choicest delights, and
criticisms of sin. As perhaps did that Petronius whom Nero call'd his Arbiter,
the Master of his revels; and that notorious ribald of Arezzo, dreaded, and yet
dear to the Italian Courtiers. I name not him for posterities sake, whom Harry
the 8. nam'd in merriment his Vicar of hell. By which compendious way all the
contagion that foreine books can infuse, will find a passage to the people
farre easier and shorter then an Indian voyage, though it could be sail'd
either by the North of Cataio Eastward, or of Canada Westward, while our
Spanish licencing gags the English Presse never so severely. But on the other
side that infection which is from books of controversie in Religion, is more
doubtfull and dangerous to the learned, then to the ignorant; and yet those
books must be permitted untoucht by the licencer. It will be hard to instance
where any ignorant man hath bin ever seduc't by Papisticall book in English,
unlesse it were commended and expounded to him by some of that Clergy: and
indeed all such tractats whether false or true are as the Prophesie of Isaiah
was to the Eunuch, not to be understood without a guide. But of our Priests and
Doctors how many have bin corrupted by studying the comments of Jesuits and
Sorbonists, and how fast they could transfuse that corruption into the people,
our experience is both late and sad. It is not forgot, since the acute and
distinct Arminius was perverted meerly by the perusing of a namelesse discourse
writt'n at Delf, which at first he took in hand to confute. Seeing therefore
that those books, & those in great abundance which are likeliest to taint both
life and doctrine, cannot be suppresst without the fall of learning, and of all
ability in disputation, and that these books of either sort are most and
soonest catching to the learned, from whom to the common people whatever is
hereticall or dissolute may quickly be convey'd, and that evill manners are as
perfectly learnt without books a thousand other ways which cannot be stopt, and
evill doctrine not with books can propagate, except a teacher guide, which he
might also doe without writing, and so beyond prohibiting, I am not able to
unfold, how this cautelous enterprise of licencing can be exempted from the
number of vain and impossible attempts. And he who were pleasantly dispos'd
could not well avoid to lik'n it to the exploit of that gallant man who thought
to pound up the crows by shutting his Parkgate. Besides another inconvenience,
if learned men be the first receivers out of books & dispredders both of vice
and error, how shall the licencers themselves be confided in, unlesse we can
conferr upon them, or they assume to themselves above all others in the Land,
the grace of infallibility, and uncorruptednesse? And again if it be true, that
a wise man like a good refiner can gather gold out of the drossiest volume, and
that a fool will be a fool with the best book, yea or without book, there is no
reason that we should deprive a wise man of any advantage to his wisdome, while
we seek to restrain from a fool, that which being restrain'd will be no
hindrance to his folly. For if there should be so much exactnesse always us'd
to keep that from him which is unfit for his reading, we should in the
judgement of Aristotle not only, but of Salomon, and of our Saviour, not
voutsafe him good precepts, and by consequence not willingly admit him to good
books; as being certain that a wise man will make better use of an idle
pamphlet, then a fool will do of sacred Scripture. 'Tis next alleg'd we must
not expose ourselves to temptations without necessity, and next to that, not
imploy our time in vain things. To both these objections one answer will serve,
out of the grounds already laid, that to all men such books are not
temptations, nor vanities; but usefull drugs and materialls wherewith to temper
and compose effective and strong med'cins, which mans life cannot want. The
rest, as children and childish men, who have not the art to qualifie and
prepare these working mineralls, well may be exhorted to forbear, but hinder'd
forcibly they cannot be by all the licencing that Sainted Inquisition could
ever yet contrive; which is what I promis'd to deliver next, That this order of
licencing conduces nothing to the end for which it was fram'd; and hath almost
prevented me by being clear already while thus much hath bin explaining. See
the ingenuity of Truth, who when she gets a free and willing hand, opens
herself faster then the pace of method and discours can overtake her. It was
the task which I began with, To shew that no Nation, or well instituted State,
if they valu'd books at all, did ever use this way of licencing; and it might
be answer'd, that this is a piece of prudence lately discover'd. To which
I return, that as it was a thing slight and obvious to think on, so if it had
bin difficult to finde out, there wanted not among them long since, who
suggested such a cours; which they not following, leave us a pattern of their
judgement, that it was not the not knowing, but the not approving, which was
the cause of their not using it. Plato, a man of high autority, indeed, but
least of all for his Commonwealth, in the book of his laws, which no City ever
yet receiv'd, fed his fancie with making many edicts to his ayrie Burgomasters,
which they who otherwise admire him, wish had bin rather buried and excus'd in
the genial cups of an Academick night-sitting. By which laws he seems to
tolerat no kind of learning, but by unalterable decree, consisting most of
practicall traditions, to the attainment whereof a Library of smaller bulk then
his own dialogues would be abundant. And there also enacts that no Poet should
so much as read to any privat man, what he had writt'n, untill the Judges and
Law-keepers had seen it, and allow'd it: But that Plato meant this Law
peculiarly to that Commonwealth which he had imagin'd, and to no other, is
evident. Why was he not else a Law-giver to himself, but a transgressor, and to
be expell'd by his own Magistrats; both for the wanton epigrams and dialogues
which he made, and his perpetuall reading of Sophron Mimus and Aristophanes,
books of grossest infamy, and also for commending the latter of them, though he
were the malicious libeller of his chief friends, to be read by the Tyrant
Dionysius, who had little need of such trash to spend his time on? But that he
knew this licencing of Poems had reference and dependence to many other
proviso's there set down in his fancied republic, which in this world could
have no place: and so neither he himself, nor any Magistrat, or City ever
imitated that cours, which tak'n apart from those other collaterall
injunctions, must needs be vain and fruitlesse. For if they fell upon one kind
of strictnesse, unlesse their care were equall to regulat all other things of
like aptnes to corrupt the mind, that single endeavour they knew would be but
a fond labour; to shut and fortifie one gate against corruption, and be
necessitated to leave others round about wide open. If we think to regulat
Printing, thereby to rectifie manners, we must regulat all recreations and
pastimes, all that is delightful to man. No musick must be heard, no song be
set or sung, but what is grave and Dorick. There must be licencing dancers,
that no gesture, motion, or deportment be taught our youth but what by their
allowance shall be thought honest; for such Plato was provided of; It will ask
more then the work of twenty licencers to examin all the lutes, the violins,
and the ghittarrs in every house; they must not be suffer'd to prattle as they
doe, but must be licenc'd what they may say. And who shall silence all the airs
and madrigalls, that whisper softnes in chambers? The Windows also, and the
Balcone's must be thought on, there are shrewd books, with dangerous
Frontispices set to sale; who shall prohibit them, shall twenty licencers? The
villages also must have their visitors to enquire what lectures the bagpipe and
the rebbeck reads ev'n to the ballatry, and the gammuth of every municipal
fidler, for these are the Countrymans Arcadia's and his Monte Mayors. Next,
what more Nationall corruption, for which England hears ill abroad, then
houshold gluttony; who shall be the rectors of our daily rioting? and what
shall be done to inhibit the multitudes that frequent those houses where
drunk'nes is sold and harbour'd? Our garments also should be referr'd to the
licencing of some more sober work-masters to see them cut into a lesse wanton
garb. Who shall regulat all the mixt conversation of our youth, male and female
together, as is the fashion of this Country, who shall still appoint what shall
be discours'd, what presum'd, and no furder? Lastly, who shall forbid and
separat all idle resort, all evill company? These things will be, and must be;
but how they shall be lest hurtfull, how lest enticing, herein consists the
grave and governing wisdom of a State. To sequester out of the world into
Atlantick and Eutopian polities which never can be drawn into use, will not
mend our condition; but to ordain wisely as in this world of evill, in the
midd'st whereof God hath plac't us unavoidably. Nor is it Plato's licencing of
books will doe this, which necessarily pulls along with it so many other kinds
of licencing, as will make us all both ridiculous and weary, and yet frustrat;
but those unwritt'n, or at least unconstraining laws of vertuous education,
religious and civill nurture, which Plato there mentions, as the bonds and
ligaments of the Commonwealth, the pillars and the sustainers of every writt'n
Statute; these they be which will bear chief sway in such matters as these,
when all licencing will be easily eluded. Impunity and remissenes, for certain
are the bane of a Commonwealth, but here the great art lyes to discern in what
the law is to bid restraint and punishment, and in what things perswasion only
is to work. If every action which is good, or evill in man at ripe years, were
to be under pittance, and prescription, and compulsion, what were vertue but
a name, what praise could be then due to well-doing, what gramercy to be sober,
just or continent? many there be that complain of divin Providence for
suffering Adam to transgresse, foolish tongues! when God gave him reason, he
gave him freedom to choose, for reason is but choosing; he had bin else a meer
artificiall Adam, such an Adam as he is in the motions. We our selves esteem
not of that obedience, or love, or gift, which is of force: God therefore left
him free, set before him a provoking object, ever almost in his eyes herein
consisted his merit, herein the right of his reward, the praise of his
abstinence. Wherefore did he creat passions within us, pleasures round about
us, but that these rightly temper'd are the very ingredients of vertu? They are
not skilfull considerers of human things, who imagin to remove sin by removing
the matter of sin; for, besides that it is a huge heap increasing under the
very act of diminishing, though some part of it may for a time be withdrawn
from some persons, it cannot from all, in such a universall thing as books are;
and when this is done, yet the sin remains entire. Though ye take from
a covetous man all his treasure, he has yet one jewell left, ye cannot bereave
him of his covetousnesse. Banish all objects of lust, shut up all youth into
the severest discipline that can be exercis'd in any hermitage, ye cannot make
them chaste, that came not thither so: such great care and wisdom is requir'd
to the right managing of this point. Suppose we could expell sin by this means;
look how much we thus expell of sin, so much we expell of vertue: for the
matter of them both is the same; remove that, and ye remove them both alike.
This justifies the high providence of God, who though he command us temperance,
justice, continence, yet powrs out before us ev'n to a profusenes all desirable
things, and gives us minds that can wander beyond all limit and satiety. Why
should we then affect a rigour contrary to the manner of God and of nature, by
abridging or scanting those means, which books freely permitted are, both to
the triall of vertue and the exercise of truth. It would be better done to
learn that the law must needs be frivolous which goes to restrain things,
uncertainly and yet equally working to good, and to evill. And were I the
chooser, a dram of well-doing should be preferr'd before many times as much the
forcible hindrance of evill-doing. For God sure esteems the growth and
compleating of one vertuous person, more then the restraint of ten vitious. And
albeit whatever thing we hear or see, sitting, walking, travelling, or
conversing may be fitly call'd our book, and is of the same effect that
writings are, yet grant the thing to be prohibited were only books, it appears
that this order hitherto is far insufficient to the end which it intends. Do we
not see, not once or oftner, but weekly that continu'd Court-libell against the
Parlament and City, Printed, as the wet sheets can witnes, and dispers't among
us, for all that licencing can doe. yet this is the prime service a man would
think, wherein this order should give proof of it self. If it were executed,
you'l say. But certain, if execution be remisse or blindfold now, and in this
particular, what will it be hereafter and in other books? If then the order
shall not be vain and frustrat, behold a new labour, Lords and Commons, ye must
repeal and proscribe all scandalous and unlicenc't books already printed and
divulg'd; after ye have drawn them up into a list, that all may know which are
condemn'd, and which not; and ordain that no forrein books be deliver'd out of
custody, till they have bin read over. This office will require the whole time
of not a few overseers, and those no vulgar men. There be also books which are
partly usefull and excellent, partly culpable and pernicious; this work will
ask as many more officials, to make expurgations, and expunctions, that the
Commonwealth of Learning be not damnify'd. In fine, when the multitude of books
encrease upon their hands, ye must be fain to catalogue all those Printers who
are found frequently offending, and forbidd the importation of their whole
suspected typography. In a word, that this your order may be exact, and not
deficient, ye must reform it perfectly according to the model of Trent and
Sevil, which I know ye abhorre to doe. Yet though ye should condescend to this,
which God forbid, the order still would be but fruitlesse and defective to that
end whereto ye meant it. If to prevent sects and schisms, who is so unread or
so uncatechis'd in story, that hath not heard of many sects refusing books as
a hindrance, and preserving their doctrine unmixt for many ages, only by
unwritt'n traditions. The Christian faith, for that was once a schism, is not
unknown to have spread all over Asia, ere any Gospel or Epistle was seen in
writing. If the amendment of manners be aym'd at, look into Italy and Spain,
whether those places be one scruple the better, the honester, the wiser, the
chaster, since all the inquisitionall rigor that hath been executed upon books.

Another reason, whereby to make it plain that this order will misse the end it
seeks, consider by the quality which ought to be in every licencer. It cannot
be deny'd but that he who is made judge to sit upon the birth, or death of
books whether they may be wafted into this world, or not, had need to be a man
above the common measure, both studious, learned, and judicious; there may be
else no mean mistakes in the censure of what is passable or not; which is also
no mean injury. If he be of such worth as behoovs him, there cannot be a more
tedious and unpleasing Journey-work, a greater losse of time levied upon his
head, then to be made the perpetuall reader of unchosen books and pamphlets,
oftimes huge volumes. There is no book that is acceptable unlesse at certain
seasons; but to be enjoyn'd the reading of that at all times, and in a hand
scars legible, whereof three pages would not down at any time in the fairest
Print, is an imposition I cannot beleeve how he that values time, and his own
studies, or is but of a sensible nostrill should be able to endure. In this one
thing I crave leave of the present licencers to be pardon'd for so thinking:
who doubtlesse took this office up, looking on it through their obedience to
the Parlament, whose command perhaps made all things seem easie and unlaborious
to them; but that this short triall hath wearied them out already, their own
expressions and excuses to them who make so many journeys to sollicit their
licence, are testimony anough. Seeing therefore those who now possesse the
imployment, by all evident signs wish themselves well ridd of it, and that no
man of worth, none that is not a plain unthrift of his own hours is ever likely
to succeed them, except he mean to put himself to the salary of
a Presse-corrector, we may easily foresee what kind of licencers we are to
expect hereafter, either ignorant, imperious, and remisse, or basely pecuniary.
This is what I had to shew, wherein this order cannot conduce to that end,
whereof it bears the intention.

I lastly proceed from the no good it can do, to the manifest hurt it causes, in
being first the greatest discouragement and affront, that can be offer'd to
learning and to learned men. It was the complaint and lamentation of Prelats,
upon every least breath of a motion to remove pluralities, and distribute more
equally Church revennu's, that then all learning would be for ever dasht and
discourag'd. But as for that opinion, I never found cause to think that the
tenth part of learning stood or fell with the Clergy: nor could I ever but hold
it for a sordid and unworthy speech of any Churchman who had a competency left
him. If therefore ye be loath to dishearten utterly and discontent, not the
mercenary crew of false pretenders to learning, but the free and ingenuous sort
of such as evidently were born to study, and love lerning for it self, not for
lucre, or any other end, but the service of God and of truth, and perhaps that
lasting fame and perpetuity of praise which God and good men have consented
shall be the reward of those whose publisht labours advance the good of
mankind, then know, that so far to distrust the judgement & the honesty of one
who hath but a common repute in learning, and never yet offended, as not to
count him fit to print his mind without a tutor and examiner, lest he should
drop a scism, or something of corruption, is the greatest displeasure and
indignity to a free and knowing spirit that can be put upon him. What advantage
is it to be a man over it is to be a boy at school, if we have only scapt the
ferular, to come under the fescu of an Imprimatur? if serious and elaborat
writings, as if they were no more then the theam of a Grammar lad under his
Pedagogue must not be utter'd without the cursory eyes of a temporizing and
extemporizing licencer. He who is not trusted with his own actions, his drift
not being known to be evill, and standing to the hazard of law and penalty, has
no great argument to think himself reputed in the Commonwealth wherin he was
born, for other then a fool or a foreiner. When a man writes to the world, he
summons up all his reason and deliberation to assist him; he searches,
meditats, is industrious, and likely consults and conferrs with his judicious
friends; after all which done he takes himself to be inform'd in what he
writes, as well as any that writ before him; if in this the most consummat act
of his fidelity and ripenesse, no years, no industry, no former proof of his
abilities can bring him to that state of maturity, as not to be still
mistrusted and suspected, unlesse he carry all his considerat diligence, all
his midnight watchings, and expence of Palladian oyl, to the hasty view of an
unleasur'd licencer, perhaps much his younger, perhaps far his inferiour in
judgement, perhaps one who never knew the labour of book-writing, and if he be
not repulst, or slighted, must appear in Print like a punie with his guardian,
and his censors hand on the back of his title to be his bayl and surety, that
he is no idiot, or seducer, it cannot be but a dishonour and derogation to the
author, to the book, to the priviledge and dignity of Learning. And what if the
author shall be one so copious of fancie, as to have many things well worth the
adding, come into his mind after licencing, while the book is yet under the
Presse, which not seldom happ'ns to the best and diligentest writers; and that
perhaps a dozen times in one book. The Printer dares not go beyond his licenc't
copy; so often then must the author trudge to his leav-giver, that those his
new insertions may be viewd; and many a jaunt will be made, ere that licencer,
for it must be the same man, can either be found, or found at leisure; mean
while either the Presse must stand still, which is no small damage, or the
author loose his accuratest thoughts, & send the book forth wors then he had
made it, which to a diligent writer is the greatest melancholy and vexation
that can befall. And how can a man teach with autority, which is the life of
teaching, how can he be a Doctor in his book as he ought to be, or else had
better be silent, whenas all he teaches, all he delivers, is but under the
tuition, under the correction of his patriarchal licencer to blot or alter what
precisely accords not with the hidebound humor which he calls his judgement.
When every acute reader upon the first sight of a pedantick licence, will be
ready with these like words to ding the book a coits distance from him, I hate
a pupil teacher, I endure not an instructer that comes to me under the wardship
of an overseeing fist. I know nothing of the licencer, but that I have his own
hand here for his arrogance; who shall warrant me his judgement? The State Sir,
replies the Stationer, but has a quick return, The State shall be my
governours, but not my criticks; they may be mistak'n in the choice of
a licencer, as easily as this licencer may be mistak'n in an author: This is
some common stuffe: and he might adde from Sir Francis Bacon, That such
authoriz'd books are but the language of the times. For though a licencer
should happ'n to be judicious more then ordnary, which will be a great jeopardy
of the next succession, yet his very office and his commission enjoyns him to
let passe nothing but what is vulgarly receiv'd already. Nay, which is more
lamentable, if the work of any deceased author, though never so famous in his
life time, and even to this day, come to their hands for licence to be Printed,
or Reprinted, if there be found in his book one sentence of a ventrous edge,
utter'd in the height of zeal, and who knows whether it might not be the dictat
of a divine Spirit, yet not suiting with every low decrepit humor of their own,
though it were Knox himself, the Reformer of a Kingdom that spake it, they will
not pardon him their dash: the sense of that great man shall to all posterity
be lost, for the fearfulnesse or the presumptuous rashnesse of a perfunctory
licencer. And to what an author this violence hath bin lately done, and in what
book of greatest consequence to be faithfully publisht, I could now instance,
but shall forbear till a more convenient season. Yet if these things be not
resented seriously and timely by them who have the remedy in their power, but
that such iron moulds as these shall have autority to knaw out the choicest
periods of exquisitest books, and to commit such a treacherous fraud against
the orphan remainders of worthiest men after death, the more sorrow will belong
to that haples race of men, whose misfortune it is to have understanding.
Henceforth let no man care to learn, or care to be more then worldly wise; for
certainly in higher matters to be ignorant and slothfull, to be a common
stedfast dunce will be the only pleasant life, and only in request.

And as it is a particular disesteem of every knowing person alive, and most
injurious to the writt'n labours and monuments of the dead, so to me it seems
an undervaluing and vilifying of the whole Nation. I cannot set so light by all
the invention, the art, the wit, the grave and solid judgement which is in
England, as that it can be comprehended in any twenty capacities how good
soever, much lesse that it should not passe except their superintendence be
over it, except it be sifted and strain'd with their strainers, that it should
be uncurrant without their manuall stamp. Truth and understanding are not such
wares as to be monopoliz'd and traded in by tickets and statutes, and
standards. We must not think to make a staple commodity of all the knowledge in
the Land, to mark and licence it like our broad cloath, and our wooll packs.
What is it but a servitude like that impos'd by the Philistims, not to be
allow'd the sharpning of our own axes and coulters, but we must repair from all
quarters to twenty licencing forges. Had any one writt'n and divulg'd erroneous
things & scandalous to honest life, misusing and forfeiting the esteem had of
his reason among men, if after conviction this only censure were adjudg'd him,
that he should never henceforth write, but what were first examin'd by an
appointed officer, whose hand should be annext to passe his credit for him,
that now he might be safely read, it could not be apprehended lesse then
a disgracefull punishment. Whence to include the whole Nation, and those that
never yet thus offended, under such a diffident and suspectfull prohibition,
may plainly be understood what a disparagement it is. So much the more, when
dettors and delinquents may walk abroad without a keeper, but unoffensive books
must not stirre forth without a visible jaylor in thir title. Nor is it to the
common people lesse then a reproach; for if we be so jealous over them, as that
we dare not trust them with an English pamphlet, what doe we but censure them
for a giddy, vitious, and ungrounded people; in such a sick and weak estate of
faith and discretion, as to be able to take nothing down but through the pipe
of a licencer. That this is care or love of them, we cannot pretend, whenas in
those Popish places where the Laity are most hated and dispis'd the same
strictnes is us'd over them. Wisdom we cannot call it, because it stops but one
breach of licence, nor that neither; whenas those corruptions which it seeks to
prevent, break in faster at other dores which cannot be shut.

And in conclusion it reflects to the disrepute of our Ministers also, of whose
labours we should hope better, and of the proficiencie which thir flock reaps
by them, then that after all this light of the Gospel which is, and is to be,
and all this continuall preaching, they should be still frequented with such an
unprincipl'd, unedify'd, and laick rabble, as that the whiffe of every new
pamphlet should stagger them out of their catechism, and Christian walking.
This may have much reason to discourage the Ministers when such a low conceit
is had of all their exhortations, and the benefiting of their hearers, as that
they are not thought fit to be turn'd loose to three sheets of paper without
a licencer, that all the Sermons, all the Lectures preacht, printed, vented in
such numbers, and such volumes, as have now wellnigh made all other books
unsalable, should not be armor anough against one single enchiridion, without
the castle of St. Angelo of an Imprimatur.

And lest som should perswade ye, Lords and Commons, that these arguments of
lerned mens discouragement at this your order, are meer flourishes, and not
reall, I could recount what I have seen and heard in other Countries, where
this kind of inquisition tyrannizes; when I have sat among their lerned men,
for that honor I had, and bin counted happy to be born in such a place of
Philosophic freedom, as they suppos'd England was, while themselvs did nothing
but bemoan the servil condition into which lerning amongst them was brought;
that this was it which had dampt the glory of Italian wits; that nothing had
bin there writt'n now these many years but flattery and fustian. There it was
that I found and visited the famous Galileo grown old, a prisner to the
Inquisition, for thinking in Astronomy otherwise then the Franciscan and
Dominican licencers thought. And though I knew that England then was groaning
loudest under the Prelaticall yoak, neverthelesse I took it as a pledge of
future happines, that other Nations were so perswaded of her liberty. Yet was
it beyond my hope that those Worthies were then breathing in her air, who
should be her leaders to such a deliverance, as shall never be forgott'n by any
revolution of time that this world hath to finish. When that was once begun, it
was as little in my fear, that what words of complaint I heard among lerned men
of other parts utter'd against the Inquisition, the same I should hear by as
lerned men at home utterd in time of Parlament against an order of licencing;
and that so generally, that when I had disclos'd my self a companion of their
discontent, I might say, if without envy, that he whom an honest quæstorship
had indear'd to the Sicilians, was not more by them importun'd against Verres,
then the favourable opinion which I had among many who honour ye, and are known
and respected by ye, loaded me with entreaties and perswasions, that I would
not despair to lay together that which just reason should bring into my mind,
toward the removal of an undeserved thraldom upon lerning. That this is not
therefore the disburdning of a particular fancie, but the common grievance of
all those who had prepar'd their minds and studies above the vulgar pitch to
advance truth in others, and from others to entertain it, thus much may
satisfie. And in their name I shall for neither friend nor foe conceal what the
generall murmur is; that if it come to inquisitioning again, and licencing, and
that we are so timorous of our selvs, and so suspicious of all men, as to fear
each book, and the shaking of every leaf, before we know what the contents are,
if some who but of late were little better then silenc't from preaching, shall
come now to silence us from reading, except what they please, it cannot be
guest what is intended by som but a second tyranny over learning: and will soon
put it out of controversie that Bishops and Presbyters are the same to us both
name and thing. That those evills of Prelaty which before from five or six and
twenty Sees were distributivly charg'd upon the whole people, will now light
wholly upon learning, is not obscure to us: whenas now the Pastor of a small
unlearned Parish, on the sudden shall be exalted Archbishop over a large dioces
of books, and yet not remove, but keep his other cure too, a mysticall
pluralist. He who but of late cry'd down the sole ordination of every novice
Batchelor of Art, and deny'd sole jurisdiction over the simplest Parishioner,
shall now at home in his privat chair assume both these over worthiest and
excellentest books and ablest authors that write them. This is not, Yee
Covnants and Protestations that we have made, this is not to put down Prelaty,
this is but to chop an Episcopacy; this is but to translate the Palace
Metropolitan from one kind of dominion into another, this is but an old
canonicall sleight of commuting our penance. To startle thus betimes at a meer
unlicenc't pamphlet will after a while be afraid of every conventicle, and
a while after will make a conventicle of every Christian meeting. But I am
certain that a State govern'd by the rules of justice and fortitude, or
a Church built and founded upon the rock of faith and true knowledge, cannot be
so pusillanimous. While things are yet not constituted in Religion, that
freedom of writing should be restrain'd by a discipline imitated from the
Prelats, and learnt by them from the Inquisition to shut us up all again into
the brest of a licencer, must needs give cause of doubt and discouragement to
all learned and religious men. Who cannot but discern the finenes of this
politic drift, and who are the contrivers; that while Bishops were to be baited
down, then all Presses might be open; it was the peoples birthright and
priviledge in time of Parlament, it was the breaking forth of light. But now
the Bishops abrogated and voided out of the Church, as if our Reformation
sought no more, but to make room for others into their seats under another
name, the Episcopall arts begin to bud again, the cruse of truth must run no
more oyle, liberty of Printing must be enthrall'd again under a Prelaticall
commission of twenty, the privilege of the people nullify'd, and which is wors,
the freedom of learning must groan again, and to her old fetters; all this the
Parlament yet sitting. Although their own late arguments and defences against
the Prelats might remember them that this obstructing violence meets for the
most part with an event utterly opposite to the end which it drives at: instead
of suppressing sects and schisms, it raises them and invests them with
a reputation: The punishing of wits enhaunces their autority, saith the Vicount
St. Albans, and a forbidd'n writing is thought to be a certain spark of truth
that flies up in the faces of them who seeke to tread it out. This order
therefore may prove a nursing mother to sects, but I shall easily shew how it
will be a step-dame to Truth: and first by disinabling us to the maintenance of
what is known already.

Well knows he who uses to consider, that our faith and knowledge thrives by
exercise, as well as our limbs and complexion. Truth is compar'd in Scripture
to a streaming fountain; if her waters flow not in a perpetuall progression,
they sick'n into a muddy pool of conformity and tradition. A man may be
a heretick in the truth; and if he beleeve things only because his Pastor sayes
so, or the Assembly so determins, without knowing other reason, though his
belief be true, yet the very truth he holds, becomes his heresie. There is not
any burden that som would gladlier post off to another, then the charge and
care of their Religion. There be, who knows not that there be of Protestants
and professors who live and dye in as arrant an implicit faith, as any lay
Papist of Loretto. A wealthy man addicted to his pleasure and to his profits,
finds Religion to be a traffick so entangl'd, and of so many piddling accounts,
that of all mysteries he cannot skill to keep a stock going upon that trade.
What should he doe? fain he would have the name to be religious, fain he would
bear up with his neighbours in that. What does he therefore, but resolvs to
give over toyling, and to find himself out som factor, to whose care and credit
he may commit the whole managing of his religious affairs; som Divine of note
and estimation that must be. To him he adheres, resigns the whole ware-house of
his religion, with all the locks and keyes into his custody; and indeed makes
the very person of that man his religion; esteems his associating with him
a sufficient evidence and commendatory of his own piety. So that a man may say
his religion is now no more within himself, but is becom a dividuall movable,
and goes and comes neer him, according as that good man frequents the house. He
entertains him, gives him gifts, feasts him, lodges him; his religion comes
home at night, praies, is liberally supt, and sumptuously laid to sleep, rises,
is saluted, and after the malmsey, or some well spic't bruage, and better
breakfasted then he whose morning appetite would have gladly fed on green figs
between Betheny and Ierusalem, his Religion walks abroad at eight, and leavs
his kind entertainer in the shop trading all day without his religion.

Another sort there be who when they hear that all things shall be order'd, all
things regulated and setl'd, nothing writt'n but what passes through the
custom-house of certain Publicans that have the tunaging and the poundaging of
all free spok'n truth, will strait give themselvs up into your hands, mak'em
& cut'em out what religion ye please; there be delights, there be recreations
and jolly pastimes that will fetch the day about from sun to sun, and rock the
tedious year as in a delightfull dream. What need they torture their heads with
that which others have tak'n so strictly, and so unalterably into their own
pourveying. These are the fruits which a dull ease and cessation of our
knowledge will bring forth among the people. How goodly, and how to be wisht
were such an obedient unanimity as this, what a fine conformity would it starch
us all into? doubtles a stanch and solid peece of frame-work, as any January
could freeze together.

Nor much better will be the consequence ev'n among the clergy themselvs; it is
no new thing never heard of before, for a parochiall Minister, who has his
reward, and is at his Hercules pillars in a warm benefice, to be easily
inclinable, if he have nothing else that may rouse up his studies, to finish
his circuit in an English concordance and a topic folio, the gatherings and
savings of a sober graduatship, a Harmony and a Catena, treading the constant
round of certain common doctrinall heads, attended with their uses, motives,
marks and means, out of which as out of an alphabet or sol fa by forming and
transforming, joyning and dis-joyning variously a little book-craft, and two
hours meditation might furnish him unspeakably to the performance of more then
a weekly charge of sermoning: not to reck'n up the infinit helps of
interlinearies, breviaries, synopses, and other loitering gear. But as for the
multitude of Sermons ready printed and pil'd up, on every text that is not
difficult, our London trading St. Thomas in his vestry, and adde to boot St.
Martin, and St. Hugh, have not within their hallow'd limits more vendible ware
of all sorts ready made: so that penury he never need fear of Pulpit provision,
having where so plenteously to refresh his magazin. But if his rear and flanks
be not impal'd, if his back dore be not secur'd by the rigid licencer, but that
a bold book may now and then issue forth, and give the assault to some of his
old collections in their trenches, it will concern him then to keep waking, to
stand in watch, to set good guards and sentinells about his receiv'd opinions,
to walk the round and counter-round with his fellow inspectors, fearing lest
any of his flock be seduc't, who also then would be better instructed, better
exercis'd and disciplin'd. And God send that the fear of this diligence which
must then be us'd, doe not make us affect the lazines of a licencing Church.

For if we be sure we are in the right, and doe not hold the truth guiltily,
which becomes not, if we our selves condemn not our own weak and frivolous
teaching, and the people for an untaught and irreligious gadding rout, what can
be more fair, then when a man judicious, learned, and of a conscience, for
aught we know, as good as theirs that taught us what we know, shall not privily
from house to house, which is more dangerous, but openly by writing publish to
the world what his opinion is, what his reasons, and wherefore that which is
now thought cannot be sound. Christ urg'd it as wherewith to justifie himself,
that he preacht in publick; yet writing is more publick then preaching; and
more easie to refutation, if need be, there being so many whose businesse and
profession meerly it is, to be the champions of Truth; which if they neglect,
what can be imputed but their sloth, or unability?

Thus much we are hinder'd and dis-inur'd by this cours of licencing toward the
true knowledge of what we seem to know. For how much it hurts and hinders the
licencers themselves in the calling of their Ministery, more then any secular
employment, if they will discharge that office as they ought, so that of
necessity they must neglect either the one duty or the other, I insist not,
because it is a particular, but leave it to their own conscience, how they will
decide it there.

There is yet behind of what I purpos'd to lay open, the incredible losse, and
detriment that this plot of licencing puts us to, more then if som enemy at sea
should stop up all our hav'ns and ports, and creeks, it hinders and retards the
importation of our richest Marchandize, Truth: nay it was first establisht and
put in practice by Antichristian malice and mystery on set purpose to
extinguish, if it were possible, the light of Reformation, and to settle
falshood; little differing from that policie wherewith the Turk upholds his
Alcoran, by the prohibition of Printing. 'Tis not deny'd, but gladly confest,
we are to send our thanks and vows to heav'n louder then most of Nations, for
that great measure of truth which we enjoy, especially in those main points
between us and the Pope, with his appertinences the Prelats: but he who thinks
we are to pitch our tent here, and have attain'd the utmost prospect of
reformation, that the mortall glasse wherein we contemplate, can shew us, till
we come to beatific vision, that man by this very opinion declares, that he is
yet farre short of Truth.

Truth indeed came once into the world with her divine Master, and was a perfect
shape most glorious to look on: but when he ascended, and his Apostles after
Him were laid asleep, then strait arose a wicked race of deceivers, who as that
story goes of the Ægyptian Typhon with his conspirators, how they dealt with
the good Osiris, took the virgin Truth, hewd her lovely form into a thousand
peeces, and scatter'd them to the four winds. From that time ever since, the
sad friends of Truth, such as durst appear, imitating the carefull search that
Isis made for the mangl'd body of Osiris, went up and down gathering up limb by
limb still as they could find them. We have not yet found them all, Lords and
Commons, nor ever shall doe, till her Masters second comming; he shall bring
together every joynt and member, and shall mould them into an immortall feature
of lovelines and perfection. Suffer not these licencing prohibitions to stand
at every place of opportunity forbidding and disturbing them that continue
seeking, that continue to do our obsequies to the torn body of our martyr'd
Saint. We boast our light; but if we look not wisely on the Sun it self, it
smites us into darknes. Who can discern those planets that are oft Combust, and
those stars of brightest magnitude that rise and set with the Sun, untill the
opposite motion of their orbs bring them to such a place in the firmament,
where they may be seen evning or morning. The light which we have gain'd, was
giv'n us, not to be ever staring on, but by it to discover onward things more
remote from our knowledge. It is not the unfrocking of a Priest, the unmitring
of a Bishop, and the removing him from off the Presbyterian shoulders that will
make us a happy Nation, no, if other things as great in the Church, and in the
rule of life both economicall and politicall be not lookt into and reform'd, we
have lookt so long upon the blaze that Zuinglius and Calvin hath beacon'd up to
us, that we are stark blind. There be who perpetually complain of schisms and
sects, and make it such a calamity that any man dissents from their maxims.
'Tis their own pride and ignorance which causes the disturbing, who neither
will hear with meeknes, nor can convince, yet all must be suppresst which is
not found in their Syntagma. They are the troublers, they are the dividers of
unity, who neglect and permit not others to unite those dissever'd peeces which
are yet wanting to the body of Truth. To be still searching what we know not,
by what we know, still closing up truth to truth as we find it (for all her
body is homogeneal, and proportionall), this is the golden rule in Theology as
well as in Arithmetick, and makes up the best harmony in a Church; not the
forc't and outward union of cold, and neutrall, and inwardly divided minds.

Lords and Commons of England, consider what Nation it is whereof ye are, and
whereof ye are the governours: a Nation not slow and dull, but of a quick,
ingenious, and piercing spirit, acute to invent, suttle and sinewy to discours,
not beneath the reach of any point the highest that human capacity can soar to.
Therefore the studies of learning in her deepest Sciences have bin so ancient,
and so eminent among us, that Writers of good antiquity, and ablest judgement
have bin perswaded that ev'n the school of Pythagoras, and the Persian wisdom
took beginning from the old Philosophy of this Iland. And that wise and civill
Roman, Julius Agricola, who govern'd once here for Cæsar, preferr'd the
naturall wits of Britain, before the labour'd studies of the French. Nor is it
for nothing that the grave and frugal Transylvanian sends out yearly from as
farre as the mountanous borders of Russia, and beyond the Hercynian wildernes,
not their youth, but their stay'd men, to learn our language, and our theologic
arts. Yet that which is above all this, the favour and the love of heav'n we
have great argument to think in a peculiar manner propitious and propending
towards us. Why else was this Nation chos'n before any other, that out of her
as out of Sion should be proclam'd and sounded forth the first tidings and
trumpet of Reformation to all Europ. And had it not bin the obstinat
perversenes of our Prelats against the divine and admirable spirit of Wicklef,
to suppresse him as a schismatic and innovator, perhaps neither the Bohemian
Husse and Jerom, no nor the name of Luther, or of Calvin had bin ever known:
the glory of reforming all our neighbours had bin compleatly ours. But now, as
our obdurat Clergy have with violence demean'd the matter, we are become
hitherto the latest and backwardest Schollers, of whom God offer'd to have made
us the teachers. Now once again by all concurrence of signs, and by the
generall instinct of holy and devout men, as they daily and solemnly expresse
their thoughts, God is decreeing to begin some new and great period in his
Church, ev'n to the reforming of Reformation it self: what does he then but
reveal Himself to his servants, and as his manner is, first to his English-men;
I say as his manner is, first to us, though we mark not the method of his
counsels, and are unworthy. Behold now this vast City: a City of refuge, the
mansion house of liberty, encompast and surrounded with his protection; the
shop of warre hath not there more anvils and hammers waking, to fashion out the
plates and instruments of armed Justice in defence of beleaguer'd Truth, then
there be pens and heads there, sitting by their studious lamps, musing,
searching, revolving new notions and idea's wherewith to present, as with their
homage and their fealty the approaching Reformation: others as fast reading,
trying all things, assenting to the force of reason and convincement. What
could a man require more from a Nation so pliant and so prone to seek after
knowledge. What wants there to such a towardly and pregnant soile, but wise and
faithfull labourers, to make a knowing people, a Nation of Prophets, of Sages,
and of Worthies. We reck'n more then five months yet to harvest; there need not
be five weeks, had we but eyes to lift up, the fields are white already. Where
there is much desire to learn, there of necessity will be much arguing, much
writing, many opinions; for opinion in good men is but knowledge in the making.
Under these fantastic terrors of sect and schism, we wrong the earnest and
zealous thirst after knowledge and understanding which God hath stirr'd up in
this city. What some lament of, we rather should rejoyce at, should rather
praise this pious forwardnes among men, to reassume the ill deputed care of
their Religion into their own hands again. A little generous prudence, a little
forbearance of one another, and som grain of charity might win all these
diligences to joyn, and unite into one generall and brotherly search after
Truth; could we but forgoe this Prelaticall tradition of crowding free
consciences and Christian liberties into canons and precepts of men. I doubt
not, if some great and worthy stranger should come among us, wise to discern
the mould and temper of a people, and how to govern it, observing the high
hopes and aims, the diligent alacrity of our extended thoughts and reasonings
in the pursuance of truth and freedom, but that he would cry out as Pirrhus
did, admiring the Roman docility and courage, if such were my Epirots, I would
not despair the greatest design that could be attempted to make a Church or
Kingdom happy. Yet these are the men cry'd out against for schismaticks and
sectaries; as if, while the Temple of the Lord was building, some cutting, some
squaring the marble, others hewing the cedars, there should be a sort of
irrationall men who could not consider there must be many schisms and many
dissections made in the quarry and in the timber, ere the house of God can be
built. And when every stone is laid artfully together, it cannot be united into
a continuity, it can but be contiguous in this world; neither can every peece
of the building be of one form; nay rather the perfection consists in this,
that out of many moderat varieties and brotherly dissimilitudes that are not
vastly disproportionall arises the goodly and the gracefull symmetry that
commends the whole pile and structure. Let us therefore be more considerat
builders, more wise in spirituall architecture, when great reformation is
expected. For now the time seems come, wherein Moses the great Prophet may sit
in heav'n rejoycing to see that memorable and glorious wish of his fulfill'd,
when not only our sev'nty Elders, but all the Lords people are become Prophets.
No marvell then though some men, and some good men too perhaps, but young in
goodnesse, as Joshua then was, envy them. They fret, and out of their own
weaknes are in agony, lest these divisions and subdivisions will undoe us. The
adversarie again applauds, and waits the hour, when they have brancht
themselves out, saith he, small anough into parties and partitions, then will
be our time. Fool! he sees not the firm root, out of which we all grow, though
into branches: nor will be ware untill he see our small divided maniples
cutting through at every angle of his ill united and unweildy brigade. And that
we are to hope better of all these supposed sects and schisms, and that we
shall not need that solicitude honest perhaps though over timorous of them that
vex in this behalf, but shall laugh in the end, at those malicious applauders
of our differences, I have these reasons to perswade me.

First, when a City shall be as it were besieg'd and blockt about, her navigable
river infested, inrodes and incursions round, defiance and battell oft rumour'd
to be marching up ev'n to her walls, and suburb trenches, that then the people,
or the greater part, more then at other times, wholly tak'n up with the study
of highest and most important matters to be reform'd, should be disputing,
reasoning, reading, inventing, discoursing, ev'n to a rarity, and admiration,
things not before discourst or writt'n of, argues first a singular good will,
contentednesse and confidence in your prudent foresight, and safe government,
Lords and Commons; and from thence derives it self to a gallant bravery and
well grounded contempt of their enemies, as if there were no small number of as
great spirits among us, as his was, who when Rome was nigh besieg'd by Hanibal,
being in the City, bought that peece of ground at no cheap rate, whereon
Hanibal himself encampt his own regiment. Next it is a lively and cherfull
presage of our happy successe and victory. For as in a body, when the blood is
fresh, the spirits pure and vigorous, not only to vital, but to rationall
faculties, and those in the acutest, and the pertest operations of wit and
suttlety, it argues in what good plight and constitution the body is, so when
the cherfulnesse of the people is so sprightly up, as that it has not only
wherewith to guard well its own freedom and safety, but to spare, and to bestow
upon the solidest and sublimest points of controversie, and new invention, it
betok'ns us not degenerated, nor drooping to a fatall decay, but casting off
the old and wrincl'd skin of corruption to outlive these pangs and wax young
again, entring the glorious waies of Truth and prosperous vertue destin'd to
become great and honourable in these latter ages. Methinks I see in my mind
a noble and puissant Nation rousing herself like a strong man after sleep, and
shaking her invincible locks: Methinks I see her as an Eagle muing her mighty
youth, and kindling her undazl'd eyes at the full midday beam; purging and
unscaling her long abused sight at the fountain it self of heav'nly radiance;
while the whole noise of timorous and flocking birds, with those also that love
the twilight, flutter about, amaz'd at what she means, and in their envious
gabble would prognosticat a year of sects and schisms.

What would ye doe then, should ye suppresse all this flowry crop of knowledge
and new light sprung up and yet springing daily in this City, should ye set an
Oligarchy of twenty ingrossers over it, to bring a famin upon our minds again,
when we shall know nothing but what is measur'd to us by their bushel? Beleeve
it, Lords and Commons, they who counsell ye to such a suppressing, doe as good
as bid ye suppresse your selves; and I will soon shew how. If it be desir'd to
know the immediat cause of all this free writing and free speaking, there
cannot be assign'd a truer then your own mild, and free, and human government;
it is the liberty, Lords and Commons, which your own valorous and happy
counsels have purchast us, liberty which is the nurse of all great wits; this
is that which hath rarify'd and enlighten'd our spirits like the influence of
heav'n; this is that which hath enfranchis'd, enlarg'd and lifted up our
apprehensions degrees above themselves. Ye cannot make us now lesse capable,
lesse knowing, lesse eagarly pursuing of the truth, unlesse ye first make your
selves, that made us so, lesse the lovers, lesse the founders of our true
liberty. We can grow ignorant again, brutish, formall, and slavish, as ye found
us; but you then must first become that which ye cannot be, oppressive,
arbitrary, and tyrannous, as they were from whom ye have free'd us. That our
hearts are now more capacious, our thoughts more erected to the search and
expectation of greatest and exactest things, is the issue of your owne vertu
propagated in us; ye cannot suppresse that unlesse ye reinforce an abrogated
and mercilesse law, that fathers may dispatch at will their own children. And
who shall then stick closest to ye, and excite others? not he who takes up
armes for cote and conduct, and his four nobles of Danegelt. Although
I dispraise not the defence of just immunities, yet love my peace better, if
that were all. Give me the liberty to know, to utter, and to argue freely
according to conscience, above all liberties.

What would be best advis'd then, if it be found so hurtfull and so unequall to
suppresse opinions for the newnes, or the unsutablenes to a customary
acceptance, will not be my task to say; I only shall repeat what I have learnt
from one of your own honourable number, a right noble and pious Lord, who had
he not sacrific'd his life and fortunes to the Church and Commonwealth, we had
not now mist and bewayl'd a worthy and undoubted patron of this argument. Ye
know him I am sure; yet I for honours sake, and may it be eternall to him,
shall name him, the Lord Brook. He writing of Episcopacy, and by the way
treating of sects and schisms, left Ye his vote, or rather now the last words
of his dying charge, which I know will ever be of dear and honour'd regard with
Ye, so full of meeknes and breathing charity, that next to his last testament,
who bequeath'd love and peace to his Disciples, I cannot call to mind where
I have read or heard words more mild and peacefull. He there exhorts us to hear
with patience and humility those, however they be miscall'd, that desire to
live purely, in such a use of Gods Ordinances, as the best guidance of their
conscience gives them, and to tolerat them, though in some disconformity to our
selves. The book itself will tell us more at large being publisht to the world,
and dedicated to the Parlament by him who both for his life and for his death
deserves, that what advice he left be not laid by without perusall.

And now the time in speciall is, by priviledge to write and speak what may help
to the furder discussing of matters in agitation. The temple of Janus with his
two controversal faces might now not unsignificantly be set open. And though
all the windes of doctrin were let loose to play upon the earth, so Truth be in
the field, we do injuriously, by licencing and prohibiting to misdoubt her
strength. Let her and Falshood grapple; who ever knew Truth put to the wors, in
a free and open encounter. Her confuting is the best and surest suppressing. He
who hears what praying there is for light and clearer knowledge to be sent down
among us, would think of other matters to be constituted beyond the discipline
of Geneva, fram'd and fabric't already to our hands. Yet when the new light
which we beg for shines in upon us, there be who envy, and oppose, if it come
not first in at their casements. What a collusion is this, whenas we are
exhorted by the wise man to use diligence, to seek for wisdom as for hidd'n
treasures early and late, that another order shall enjoyn us to know nothing
but by statute. When a man hath bin labouring the hardest labour in the deep
mines of knowledge, hath furnisht out his findings in all their equipage, drawn
forth his reasons as it were a battell raung'd, scatter'd and defeated all
objections in his way, calls out his adversary into the plain, offers him the
advantage of wind and sun, if he please; only that he may try the matter by
dint of argument, for his opponents then to sculk, to lay ambushments, to keep
a narrow bridge of licencing where the challenger should passe, though it be
valour anough in souldiership, is but weaknes and cowardice in the wars of
Truth. For who knows not that Truth is strong next to the Almighty; she needs
no policies, nor stratagems, nor licencings to make her victorious, those are
the shifts and the defences that error uses against her power: give her but
room, & do not bind her when she sleeps, for then she speaks not true, as the
old Proteus did, who spake oracles only when he was caught & bound, but then
rather she turns herself into all shapes, except her own, and perhaps tunes her
voice according to the time, as Micaiah did before Ahab, untill she be adjur'd
into her own likenes. Yet is it not impossible that she may have more shapes
then one. What else is all that rank of things indifferent, wherein Truth may
be on this side, or on the other, without being unlike her self. What but
a vain shadow else is the abolition of those ordinances, that hand writing
nayl'd to the crosse, what great purchase is this Christian liberty which Paul
so often boasts of. His doctrine is, that he who eats or eats not, regards
a day, or regards it not, may doe either to the Lord. How many other things
might be tolerated in peace, and left to conscience, had we but charity, and
were it not the chief strong hold of our hypocrisie to be ever judging one
another. I fear yet this iron yoke of outward conformity hath left a slavish
print upon our necks; the ghost of a linnen decency yet haunts us. We stumble
and are impatient at the least dividing of one visible congregation from
another, though it be not in fundamentalls; and through our forwardnes to
suppresse, and our backwardnes to recover any enthrall'd peece of truth out of
the gripe of custom, we care not to keep truth separated from truth, which is
the fiercest rent and disunion of all. We doe not see that while we still
affect by all means a rigid externall formality, we may as soon fall again into
a grosse conforming stupidity, a stark and dead congealment of wood and hay and
stubble forc't and frozen together, which is more to the sudden degenerating of
a Church then many subdichotomies of petty schisms. Not that I can think well
of every light separation, or that all in a Church is to be expected gold and
silver and pretious stones: it is not possible for man to sever the wheat from
the tares, the good fish from the other frie; that must be the Angels Ministery
at the end of mortall things. Yet if all cannot be of one mind, as who looks
they should be? this doubtles is more wholsome, more prudent, and more
Christian that many be tolerated, rather then all compell'd. I mean not
tolerated Popery, and open superstition, which as it extirpats all religions
and civill supremacies, so it self should be extirpat, provided first that all
charitable and compassionat means be us'd to win and regain the weak and the
misled: that also which is impious or evil absolutely either against faith or
maners no law can possibly permit, that intends not to unlaw it self: but those
neighboring differences, or rather indifferences, are what I speak of, whether
in some point of doctrine or of discipline, which though they may be many, yet
need not interrupt the unity of Spirit, if we could but find among us the bond
of peace. In the mean while if any one would write, and bring his helpfull hand
to the slow-moving Reformation which we labour under, if Truth have spok'n to
him before others, or but seem'd at least to speak, who hath so bejesuited us
that we should trouble that man with asking licence to doe so worthy a deed?
and not consider this, that if it come to prohibiting, there is not ought more
likely to be prohibited then truth it self; whose first appearance to our eyes
blear'd and dimm'd with prejudice and custom, is more unsightly and unplausible
then many errors, ev'n as the person is of many a great man slight and
contemptible to see to. And what doe they tell us vainly of new opinions, when
this very opinion of theirs, that none must be heard, but whom they like, is
the worst and newest opinion of all others; and is the chief cause why sects
and schisms doe so much abound, and true knowledge is kept at distance from us;
besides yet a greater danger which is in it. For when God shakes a Kingdome
with strong and healthfull commotions to a generall reforming, 'tis not untrue
that many sectaries and false teachers are then busiest in seducing; but yet
more true it is, that God then raises to his own work men of rare abilities,
and more then common industry not only to look back and revise what hath bin
taught heretofore, but to gain furder and goe on, some new enlighten'd steps in
the discovery of truth. For such is the order of Gods enlightning his Church,
to dispense and deal out by degrees his beam, so as our earthly eyes may best
sustain it. Neither is God appointed and confin'd, where and out of what place
these his chosen shall be first heard to speak; for he sees not as man sees,
chooses not as man chooses, lest we should devote our selves again to set
places, and assemblies, and outward callings of men; planting our faith one
while in the old Convocation house, and another while in the Chapell at
Westminster; when all the faith and religion that shall be there canoniz'd, is
not sufficient without plain convincement, and the charity of patient
instruction to supple the least bruise of conscience, to edifie the meanest
Christian, who desires to walk in the Spirit, and not in the letter of human
trust, for all the number of voices that can be there made; no though Harry the
7. himself there, with all his leige tombs about him, should lend them voices
from the dead, to swell their number. And if the men be erroneous who appear to
be the leading schismaticks, what witholds us but our sloth, our self-will, and
distrust in the right cause, that we doe not give them gentle meeting and
gentle dismissions, that we debate not and examin the matter throughly with
liberall and frequent audience; if not for their sakes, yet for our own? seeing
no man who hath tasted learning, but will confesse the many waies of profiting
by those who not contented with stale receits are able to manage, and set forth
new positions to the world. And were they but as the dust and cinders of our
feet, so long as in that notion they may yet serve to polish and brighten the
armoury of Truth, ev'n for that respect they were not utterly to be cast away.
But if they be of those whom God hath fitted for the speciall use of these
times with eminent and ample gifts, and those perhaps neither among the
Priests, nor among the Pharisees, and we in the hast of a precipitant zeal
shall make no distinction, but resolve to stop their mouths, because we fear
they come with new and dangerous opinions, as we commonly forejudge them ere we
understand them, no lesse then woe to us, while thinking thus to defend the
Gospel, we are found the persecutors.

There have bin not a few since the beginning of this Parlament, both of the
Presbytery and others who by their unlicen't books to the contempt of an
Imprimatur first broke that triple ice clung about our hearts, and taught the
people to see day: I hope that none of those were the perswaders to renew upon
us this bondage which they themselves have wrought so much good by contemning.
But if neither the check that Moses gave to young Joshua, nor the countermand
which our Saviour gave to young John, who was so ready to prohibit those whom
he thought unlicenc't, be not anough to admonish our Elders how unacceptable to
God their testy mood of prohibiting is, if neither their own remembrance what
evill hath abounded in the Church by this lett of licencing, and what good they
themselves have begun by transgressing it, be not anough, but that they will
perswade, and execute the most Dominican part of the Inquisition over us, and
are already with one foot in the stirrup so active at suppressing, it would be
no unequall distribution in the first place to suppresse the suppressors
themselves; whom the change of their condition hath puft up, more then their
late experience of harder times hath made wise.

And as for regulating the Presse, let no man think to have the honour of
advising ye better then your selves have done in that Order publisht next
before this, that no book be Printed, unlesse the Printers and the Authors
name, or at least the Printers be register'd. Those which otherwise come forth,
if they be found mischievous and libellous, the fire and the executioner will
be the timeliest and the most effectuall remedy, that mans prevention can use.
For this authentic Spanish policy of licencing books, if I have said aught,
will prove the most unlicenc't book it self within a short while; and was the
immediat image of a Star-chamber decree to that purpose made in those very
times when that Court did the rest of those her pious works, for which she is
now fall'n from the Starres with Lucifer. Whereby ye may guesse what kinde of
State prudence, what love of the people, what care of Religion, or good manners
there was at the contriving, although with singular hypocrisie it pretended to
bind books to their good behaviour. And how it got the upper hand of your
precedent Order so well constituted before, if we may beleeve those men whose
profession gives them cause to enquire most, it may be doubted there was in it
the fraud of some old patentees and monopolizers in the trade of book-selling;
who under pretence of the poor in their Company not to be defrauded, and the
just retaining of each man his severall copy, which God forbid should be
gainsaid, brought divers glosing colours to the House, which were indeed but
colours, and serving to no end except it be to exercise a superiority over
their neighbours, men who doe not therefore labour in an honest profession to
which learning is indetted, that they should be made other mens vassalls.
Another end is thought was aym'd at by some of them in procuring by petition
this Order, that having power in their hands, malignant books might the easier
scape abroad, as the event shews. But of these Sophisms and Elenchs of
marchandize I skill not: This I know, that errors in a good government and in
a bad are equally almost incident; for what Magistrate may not be mis-inform'd,
and much the sooner, if liberty of Printing be reduc't into the power of a few;
but to redresse willingly and speedily what hath bin err'd, and in highest
autority to esteem a plain advertisement more then others have done a sumptuous
bribe, is a vertue (honour'd Lords and Commons) answerable to Your highest
actions, and whereof none can participat but greatest and wisest men.

The End.
The Reason of Church Government Urg'd Against Prelaty

THE PREFACE.

In the publishing of humane lawes, which for the most part aime not beyond the
good of civill society, to set them barely forth to the people without reason or
Preface, like a physicall prescript, or only with threatnings, as it were
a lordly command, in the judgement of Plato was thought to be done neither
generously nor wisely. His advice was, seeing that persuasion certainly is
a more winning, and more manlike way to keepe men in obedience then feare, that
to such lawes as were of principall moment, there should be us'd as an
induction, some well temper'd discourse, shewing how good, how gainfull, how
happy it must needs be to live according to honesty and justice, which being
utter'd with those native colours and graces of speech, as true eloquence the
daughter of vertue can best bestow upon her mothers praises, would so incite,
and in a manner, charme the multitude into the love of that which is really
good, as to imbrace it ever after, not of custome and awe, which most men do,
but of choice and purpose, with true and constant delight. But this practice we
may learn, from a better & more ancient authority, then any heathen writer hath
to give us, and indeed being a point of so high wisdome & worth, how could it be
but we should find it in that book, within whose sacred context all wisdome is
infolded? Moses therefore the only Lawgiver that we can believe to have beene
visibly taught of God, knowing how vaine it was to write lawes to men whose
hearts were not first season'd with the knowledge of God and of his workes,
began from the book of Genesis, as a prologue to his lawes; which Josephus right
well hath noted. That the nation of the Jewes, reading therein the universall
goodnesse of God to all creatures in the Creation, and his peculiar favour to
them in his election of Abraham their ancestor, from whom they could derive so
many blessings upon themselves, might be mov'd to obey sincerely by knowing so
good a reason of their obedience. If then in the administration of civill
justice, and under the obscurity of Ceremoniall rites, such care was had by the
wisest of the heathen, and by Moses among the Jewes, to instruct them at least
in a generall reason of that government to which their subjection was requir'd,
how much more ought the members of the Church under the Gospell seeke to their
understanding in the reason of that government which the Church claimes to have
over them: especially for that the Church hath in her immediate cure those inner
parts and affections of the mind where the seat of reason is; having power to
examine our spirituall knowledge, and to demand from us in Gods behalfe
a service intirely reasonable. But because about the manner and order of this
government, whether it ought to be Presbyteriall, or Prelaticall, such endlesse
question, or rather uproare is arisen in this land, as may be justly term'd,
what the feaver is to the Physitians, the eternall reproach of our Divines;
whilest other profound Clerks of late greatly, as they conceive, to the
advancement of Prelaty, are so earnestly meting out the Lydian proconsular Asia,
to make good the prime metropolis of Ephesus, as if some of our Prelates in all
haste meant to change their soile, and become neighbours to the English Bishop
of Chalcedon; and whilest good Breerwood as busily bestirres himselfe in our
vulgar tongue to divide precisely the three Patriarchats, of Rome, Alexandria,
and Antioch, and whether to any of these England doth belong, I shall in the
meane while not cease to hope through the mercy and grace of Christ, the head
and husband of his Church, that England shortly is to belong, neither to See
Patriarchall, nor See Prelaticall, but to the faithfull feeding and disciplining
of that ministeriall order, which the blessed Apostles constituted throughout
the Churches: and this I shall assay to prove can be no other, then that of
Presbyters and Deacons. And if any man incline to thinke I undertake a taske too
difficult for my yeares, I trust through the supreme inlightning assistance
farre otherwise; for my yeares, be they few or many, what imports it? So they
bring reason, let that be lookt on: and for the task, from hence that the
question in hand is so needfull to be known at this time chiefly by every meaner
capacity, and containes in it the explication of many admirable and heavenly
privileges reacht out to us by the Gospell, I conclude the task must be easie.
God having to this end ordain'd his Gospell to be the revelation of his power
and wisdome in Christ Jesus. And this is one depth of his wisdome, that he could
so plainly reveale so great a measure of it to the grosse distorted apprehension
of decay'd mankinde. Let others therefore dread and shun the Scriptures for
their darknesse, I shall wish I may deserve to be reckon'd among those who
admire and dwell upon them for their clearnesse. And this seemes to be the cause
why in those places of holy writ, wherein is treated of Church-government, the
reasons thereof are not formally, and profestly set downe, because to him that
heeds attentively the drift and scope of Christian profession, they easily imply
themselves, which thing further to explane, having now prefac'd enough, I shall
no longer deferre.

CHAP. I.

That Church-governement is prescrib'd in the Gospell, and that to say otherwise
is unsound.

The first and greatest reason of Church-government, we may securely with the
assent of many on the adverse part, affirme to be, because we finde it so
ordain'd and set out to us by the appointment of God in the Scriptures; but
whether this be Presbyteriall, or Prelaticall, it cannot be brought to the
scanning, untill I have said what is meet to some who do not think it for the
ease of their inconsequent opinions, to grant that Church discipline is
platform'd in the Bible, but that it is left to the discretion of men. To this
conceit of theirs I answer, that it is both unsound and untrue. For there is not
that thing in the world of more grave and urgent importance throughout the whole
life of man, then is discipline. What need I instance? He that hath read with
judgement, of Nations and Commonwealths, of Cities and Camps, of peace and
warre, sea and land, will readily agree that the flourishing and decaying of all
civill societies, all the moments and turnings of humane occasions are mov'd to
and fro as upon the axle of discipline. So that whatsoever power or sway in
mortall things weaker men have attributed to fortune, I durst with more
confidence (the honour of divine providence ever sav'd) ascribe either to the
vigor, or the slacknesse of discipline. Nor is there any sociable perfection in
this life civill or sacred that can be above discipline, but she is that which
with her musicall cords preserves and holds all the parts thereof together.
Hence in those perfect armies of Cyrus in Xenophon, and Scipio in the Roman
stories, the excellence of military skill was esteem'd, not by the not needing,
but by the readiest submitting to the edicts of their commander. And certainly
discipline is not only the removall of disorder, but if any visible shape can be
given to divine things, the very visible shape and image of vertue, whereby she
is not only seene in the regular gestures and motions of her heavenly paces as
she walkes, but also makes the harmony of her voice audible to mortall eares.
Yea the Angels themselves, in whom no disorder is fear'd, as the Apostle that
saw them in his rapture describes, are distinguisht and quaterniond into their
celestiall Princedomes, and Satrapies, according as God himselfe hath writ his
imperiall decrees through the great provinces of heav'n. The state also of the
blessed in Paradise, though never so perfect, is not therefore left without
discipline, whose golden survaying reed marks out and measures every quarter and
circuit of new Jerusalem. Yet is it not to be conceiv'd that those eternall
effluences of sanctity and love in the glorified Saints should by this meanes be
confin'd and cloy'd with repetition of that which is prescrib'd, but that our
happinesse may orbe it selfe into a thousand vagancies of glory and delight, and
with a kinde of eccentricall equation be as it were an invariable Planet of joy
and felicity, how much lesse can we believe that God would leave his fraile and
feeble, though not lesse beloved Church here below to the perpetuall stumble of
conjecture and disturbance in this our darke voyage without the card and
compasse of Discipline. Which is so hard to be of mans making, that we may see
even in the guidance of a civill state to worldly happinesse, it is not for
every learned, or every wise man, though many of them consult in common, to
invent or frame a discipline, but if it be at all the worke of man, it must be
of such a one as is a true knower of himselfe, and himselfe in whom
contemplation and practice, wit, prudence, fortitude, and eloquence must be
rarely met, both to comprehend the hidden causes of things, and span in his
thoughts all the various effects that passion or complexion can worke in mans
nature; and hereto must his hand be at defiance with gaine, and his heart in all
vertues heroick. So far is it from the kenne of these wretched projectors of
ours that bescraull their Pamflets every day with new formes of government for
our Church. And therefore all the ancient lawgivers were either truly inspir'd
as Moses, or were such men as with authority anough might give it out to be so,
as Minos, Lycurgus, Numa, because they wisely forethought that men would never
quietly submit to such a discipline as had not more of Gods hand in it then
mans. To come within the narrownesse of houshold government, observation will
shew us many deepe counsellers of state and judges to demean themselves
incorruptly in the setl'd course of affaires, and many worthy Preachers upright
in their lives, powerfull in their audience; but look upon either of these men
where they are left to their own disciplining at home, and you shall soone
perceive for all their single knowledge and uprightnesse, how deficient they are
in the regulating of their own family; not only in what may concerne the
vertuous and decent composure of their minds in their severall places, but that
which is of a lower and easier performance, the right possessing of the outward
vessell, their body, in health or sicknesse, rest or labour, diet, or
abstinence, whereby to render it more pliant to the soule, and usefull to the
Common-wealth: which if men were but as good to discipline themselves, as some
are to tutor their Horses and Hawks, it could not be so grosse in most
housholds. If then it appear so hard and so little knowne, how to governe
a house well, which is thought of so easie discharge, and for every mans
undertaking, what skill of man, what wisdome, what parts, can be sufficient to
give lawes & ordinances to the elect houshold of God? If we could imagine that
he had left it at randome without his provident and gracious ordering, who is he
so arrogant so presumptuous that durst dispose and guide the living arke of the
holy Ghost, though he should finde it wandring in the field of Bethshemesh,
without the conscious warrant of some high calling. But no profane insolence can
paralell that which our Prelates dare avouch, to drive outragiously, and shatter
the holy arke of the Church, not born upon their shoulders with pains and labour
in the word, but drawne with rude oxen their officials, and their owne brute
inventions. Let them make shewes of reforming while they will, so long as the
Church is mounted upon the Prelaticall Cart, and not as it ought betweene the
hands of the Ministers, it will but shake and totter, and he that sets to his
hand though with a good intent to hinder the shogging of it, in this unlawfull
waggonry wherein it rides, let him beware it be not fatall to him as it was to
Uzza. Certainly if God be the father of his family the Church, wherein could he
expresse that name more, then in training it up under his owne all-wise and dear
Oeconomy, not turning it loose to the havock of strangers and wolves that would
ask no better plea then this to doe in the Church of Christ, what ever humour
faction, policy, or licentious will would prompt them to. Againe, if Christ be
the Churches husband expecting her to be presented before him a pure unspotted
virgin; in what could he shew his tender love to her more, then in prescribing
his owne wayes which he best knew would be to the improvement of her health and
beauty with much greater care doubtlesse then the Persian King could appoint for
his Queene Esther those maiden dietings & set prescriptions of baths, & odors,
which may render her at last the more amiable to his eye. For of any age or sex,
most unfitly may a virgin be left to an uncertaine and arbitrary education. Yea
though she be well instructed, yet is she still under a more strait tuition,
especially if betroth'd. In like manner the Church bearing the same resemblance,
it were not reason to think she should be left destitute of that care which is
as necessary, and proper to her, as instruction. For publick preaching indeed is
the gift of the Spirit working as best seemes to his secret will, but discipline
is the practick work of preaching directed and apply'd as is most requisite to
particular duty; without which it were all one to the benefit of souls, as it
would be to the cure of bodies, if all the Physitians in London should get into
the severall Pulpits of the City, and assembling all the diseased in every
parish should begin a learned Lecture of Pleurisies, Palsies, Lethargies, to
which perhaps none there present were inclin'd, and so without so much as
feeling one puls, or giving the least order to any skilfull Apothecary, should
dismisse 'em from time to time, some groaning, some languishing, some expiring,
with this only charge to look well to themselves, and do as they heare. Of what
excellence and necessity then Church-discipline is, how beyond the faculty of
man to frame, and how dangerous to be left to mans invention who would be every
foot turning it to sinister ends, how properly also it is the worke of God as
father, and of Christ as Husband of the Church; we have by thus much heard.

CHAP. II.

That Church governement is set downe in holy Scripture, and that to say
otherwise is untrue.

As therefore it is unsound to say that God hath not appointed any set government
in his Church, so is it untrue. Of the time of the Law there can be no doubt;
for to let passe the first institution of Priests and Levites, which is too
cleare to be insisted upon, when the Temple came to be built, which in plaine
judgement could breed no essentiall change either in religion, or in the
Priestly government; yet God to shew how little he could endure that men should
be tampring and contriving in his worship, though in things of lesse regard,
gave to David for Solomon not only a pattern and modell of the Temple, but
a direction for the courses of the Priests and Levites, and for all the worke of
their service. At the returne from the Captivity things were only restor'd after
the ordinance of Moses and David; or if the least alteration be to be found,
they had with them inspired men, Prophets, and it were not sober to say they did
ought of moment without divine intimation. In the Prophesie of Ez-kiel from the
40 Chapt. onward, after the destruction of the Temple, God by his Prophet
seeking to weane the hearts of the Jewes from their old law to expect a new and
more perfect reformation under Christ, sets out before their eyes the stately
fabrick & constitution of his Church, with al the ecclesiasticall functions
appertaining; indeed the description is as sorted best to the apprehension of
those times, typicall and shadowie, but in such manner as never yet came to
passe, nor never must literally, unlesse we mean to annihilat the Gospel. But so
exquisit and lively the description is in portraying the new state of the
Church, and especially in those points where government seemes to be most
active, that both Jewes and Gentiles might have good cause to be assur'd, that
God when ever he meant to reforme his Church, never intended to leave the
governement thereof delineated here in such curious architecture, to be patch't
afterwards, and varnish't over with the devices and imbellishings of mans
imagination. Did God take such delight in measuring out the pillars, arches, and
doores of a materiall Temple, was he so punctuall and circumspect in lavers,
altars, and sacrifices soone after to be abrogated, lest any of these should
have beene made contrary to his minde? is not a farre more perfect worke more
agreeable to his perfection in the most perfect state of the Church militant,
the new alliance of God to man? should not he rather now by his owne prescribed
discipline have cast his line and levell upon the soule of man which is his
rationall temple, and by the divine square and compasse thereof forme and
regenerate in us the lovely shapes of vertues and graces, the sooner to edifie
and accomplish that immortall stature of Christs body which is his Church, in
all her glorious lineaments and proportions. And that this indeed God hath done
for us in the Gospel we shall see with open eyes, not under a vaile. We may
passe over the history of the Acts and other places, turning only to those
Epistles of S. Paul to Timothy and Titus: where the spirituall eye may discerne
more goodly and gracefully erected then all the magnificence of Temple or
Tabernacle, such a heavenly structure of evangelick discipline so diffusive of
knowledge and charity to the prosperous increase and growth of the Church, that
it cannot be wonder'd if that elegant and artfull symmetry of the promised new
temple in Ezekiel, and all those sumptuous things under the Law were made to
signifie the inward beauty and splendor of the Christian Church thus govern'd.
And whether this be commanded let it now be judg'd. S. Paul after his preface to
the first of Timothy which hee concludes in the 17 Verse with Amen, enters upon
the subject of his Epistle which is to establish the Church-government with
a command. This charge I commit to thee son Timothy: according to the prophecies
which went before on thee, that thou by them might'st war a good warfare. Which
is plain enough thus expounded. This charge I commit to thee wherein I now go
about to instruct thee how thou shalt set up Church-discipline, that thou
might'st warre a good warfare, bearing thy selfe constantly and faithfully in
the Ministery, which in the I to the Corinthians is also call'd a warfare: and
so after a kinde of Parenthesis concerning Hymenæus he returnes to his command
though under the milde word of exhorting, Cap.2.v.I. I exhort therefore. As if
he had interrupted his former command by the occasionall mention of Hymenaeus.
More beneath in the 14 V. of the 3 C. when he hath deliver'd the duties of
Bishops or Presbyters and Deacons not once naming any other order in the Church,
he thus addes. These things write I unto thee hoping to come unto thee shortly
(such necessity it seems there was) but if I tarry long, that thou mai'st know
how thou ought'st to behave thy selfe in the house of God. From this place it
may be justly ask't, whether Timothy by this here written might know what was to
be knowne concerning the orders of Church governours or no? If he might, then in
such a cleere text as this may we know too without further jangle; if he might
not, then did S. Paul write insufficiently, and moreover said not true, for he
saith here he might know, and I perswade my selfe he did know ere this was
written, but that the Apostle had more regard to the instruction of us, then to
the informing of him. In the fifth Chap. after some other Church precepts
concerning discipline, mark what a dreadfull command followes, Verse 21.
I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that
thou observe these things, and as if all were not yet sure anough, he closes up
the Epistle with an adjuring charge thus. I give thee charge in the sight of God
who quickneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, that thou keepe this
commandement: that is the whole commandement concerning discipline, being the
maine purpose of the Epistle: although Hooker would faine have this denouncement
referr'd to the particular precept going before, because the word Commandement
is in the singular number, not remembring that even in the first Chapt. of this
Epistle, the word Commandement is us'd in a plurall sense, Vers. 5. Now the end
of the Commandement is charity. And what more frequent then in like manner to
say the Law of Moses. So that either to restraine the significance too much, or
too much to inlarg it would make the adjuration either not so waighty, or not so
pertinent. And thus we find here that the rules of Church-discipline are not
only commanded, but hedg'd about with such a terrible impalement of commands, as
he that will break through wilfully to violate the least of them, must hazard
the wounding of his conscience even to death. Yet all of this notwithstanding we
shall finde them broken wellnigh all by the faire pretenders even of the next
ages. No lesse to the contempt of him whom they fain to be the archfounder of
prelaty S. Peter, who by what he writes in the 5 Chap. of his first Epistle
should seeme to be farre another man then tradition reports him: there he
commits to the Presbyters only full authority both of feeding the flock, and
Episcopating: and commands that obedience be given to them as to the mighty hand
of God, wch is his mighty ordinance. Yet all this was as nothing to repell the
ventrous boldnesse of innovation that ensu'd, changing the decrees of God that
is immutable, as if they had been breath'd by man. Neverthelesse when Christ by
those visions of S. John foreshewes the reformation of his Church, he bids him
take his Reed and meet it out againe after the first patterne, for he prescribes
him no other. Arise, said the Angell, and measure the Temple of God and the
Altar, and them that worship therein. What is there in the world can measure men
but discipline? Our word ruling imports no lesse. Doctrine indeed is the
measure, or at least the reason of the measure, tis true, but unlesse the
measure be apply'd to that which it is to measure, how can it actually doe its
proper worke. Whether therefore discipline be all one with doctrine, or the
particular application thereof to this or that person, we all agree that
doctrine must be such only as is commanded; or whether it be something really
differing from doctrine, yet was it only of Gods appointment, as being the most
adequat measure of the Church and her children, which is here the office of
a great Evangelist and the reed given him from heaven. But that part of the
Temple which is not thus measur'd, so farre is it from being in Gods tuition or
delight, that in the following verse he rejects it, however in shew and
visibility it may seeme a part of his Church, yet in as much as it lyes thus
unmeasur'd he leaves it to be trampl'd by the Gentiles, that is to be polluted
with idolatrous and Gentilish rites and ceremonies. And that the principall
reformation here foretold is already come to passe as well in discipline as in
doctrine the state of our neighbour Churches afford us to behold. Thus through
all the periods and changes of the Church it hath beene prov'd that God hath
still reserv'd to himselfe the right of enacting Church-government.

CHAP. III.

That it is dangerous and unworthy the Gospell to hold that Church-government is
to be pattern'd by the Law, as B. Andrews and the Primat of Armagh maintaine.

We may returne now from this interposing difficulty thus remov'd, to affirme,
that since Church-government is so strictly commanded in Gods Word, the first
and greatest reason why we should submit thereto, is because God hath so
commanded. But whether of these two, Prelaty or Presbytery can prove it selfe to
be supported by this first and greatest reason, must be the next dispute.
Wherein this position is to be first layd down as granted; that I may not follow
a chase rather then an argument, that one of these two, and none other is of
Gods ordaining, and if it be, that ordinance must be evident in the Gospell. For
the imperfect and obscure institution of the Law, which the Apostles themselves
doubt not oft-times to vilifie, cannot give rules to the compleat and glorious
ministration of the Gospell, which lookes on the Law, as on a childe, not as on
a tutor. And that the Prelates have no sure foundation in the Gospell, their own
guiltinesse doth manifest: they would not else run questing up as high as Adam
to fetch their originall, as tis said one of them lately did in publick. To
which assertion, had I heard it, because I see they are so insatiable of
antiquity, I should have gladly assented, and confest them yet more ancient. For
Lucifer before Adam was the first prelat Angel, and both he, as is commonly
thought, and our forefather Adam, as we all know, for aspiring above their
orders, were miserably degraded. But others better advis'd are content to
receive their beginning from Aaron and his sons, among whom B. Andrews of late
yeares, and in these times the Primat of Armagh for their learning are reputed
the best able to say what may be said in this opinion. The Primat in his
discourse about the originall of Episcopacy newly revis'd begins thus. The
ground of Episcopacy is fetcht partly from the pattern prescrib'd by God in the
Old Testament, and partly from the imitation thereof brought in by the Apostles.
Herein I must entreat to be excus'd of the desire I have to be satisfi'd, how
for example the ground of Episcop. is fetch't partly from the example of the old
Testament, by whom next, and by whose authority. Secondly, how the
Church-government under the Gospell can be rightly call'd an imitation of that
in the old Testament? for that the Gospell is the end and fulfilling of the Law,
our liberty also from the bondage of the Law I plainly reade. How then the ripe
age of the Gospell should be put to schoole againe, and learn to governe her
selfe from the infancy of the Law, the stronger to imitate the weaker, the
freeman to follow the captive, the learned to be lesson'd by the rude, will be
a hard undertaking to evince from any of those principles which either art or
inspiration hath written. If any thing done by the Apostles may be drawne
howsoever to a likenesse of something Mosaicall, if it cannot be prov'd that it
was done of purpose in imitation, as having the right thereof grounded in
nature, and not in ceremony or type, it will little availe the matter. The whole
Judaick law is either politicall, and to take pattern by that, no Christian
nation ever thought it selfe oblig'd in conscience; or morall, which containes
in it the observation of whatsoever is substantially, and perpetually true and
good, either in religion, or course of life. That which is thus morall, besides
what we fetch from those unwritten lawes and Ideas which nature hath ingraven in
us, the Gospell, as stands with her dignity most, lectures to us from her own
authentick hand-writing and command, not copies out from the borrow'd manuscript
of a subservient scrowl, by way of imitating. As well might she be said in her
Sacrament of water to imitate the baptisme of Iohn. What though she retaine
excommunication us'd in the Synagogue, retain the morality of the Sabbath, she
does not therefore imitate the law her underling, but perfect her. All that was
morally deliver'd from the law to the Gospell in the office of the Priests and
Levites, was that there should be a ministery set a part to teach and discipline
the Church, both which duties the Apostles thought good to commit to the
Presbyters. And if any distinction of honour were to be made among them, they
directed it should be to those not that only rule well, but especially to those
that labour in the word and doctrine. By which we are taught that laborious
teaching is the most honourable Prelaty that one Minister can have above another
in the Gospell: if therefore the superiority of Bishopship be grounded on the
Priesthood as part of the morall law, it cannot be said to be an imitation; for
it were ridiculous that morality should imitate morality, which ever was the
same thing. This very word of patterning or imitating excludes Episcopacy from
the solid and grave Ethicall law, and betraies it to be a meere childe of
ceremony, or likelier some misbegotten thing, that having pluckt the gay
feathers of her obsolet bravery to hide her own deformed barenesse, now vaunts
and glories in her stolne plumes. In the meane while what danger there is
against the very life of the Gospell to make in any thing the typical law her
pattern, and how impossible in that which touches the Priestly government,
I shall use such light as I have receav'd, to lay open. It cannot be unknowne by
what expressions the holy Apostle S. Paul spares not to explane to us the nature
and condition of the law, calling those ordinances which were the chiefe and
essentiall offices of the Priests, the elements and rudiments of the world both
weake and beggarly. Now to breed, and bring up the children of the promise, the
heirs of liberty and grace under such a kinde of government as is profest to be
but an imitation of that ministery which engender'd to bondage the sons of Agar,
how can this be but a foul injury and derogation, if not a cancelling of that
birth-right and immunity which Christ hath purchas'd for us with his blood. For
the ministration of the law consisting of carnall things, drew to it such
a ministery as consisted of carnall respects, dignity, precedence, and the like.
And such a ministery establish't in the Gospell, as is founded upon the points
and termes of superiority, and nests it selfe in worldly honours, will draw to
it, and we see it doth, such a religion as runnes back againe to the old pompe
and glory of the flesh. For doubtlesse there is a certaine attraction and
magnetick force betwixt the religion and the ministeriall forme thereof. If the
religion be pure, spirituall, simple, and lowly, as the Gospel most truly is,
such must the face of the ministery be. And in like manner if the forme of the
Ministery be grounded in the worldly degrees of autority, honour, temporall
jurisdiction, we see it with our eyes it will turne the inward power and purity
of the Gospel into the outward carnality of the law; evaporating and exhaling
the internall worship into empty conformities, and gay shewes. And what remains
then but that wee should runne into as dangerous and deadly apostacy as our
lamented neighbours the Papists, who by this very snare and pitfall of imitating
the ceremonial law, fel into that irrecoverable superstition, as must needs make
void the cov'nant of salvation to them that persist in this blindnesse.

CHAP. IV.

That it is impossible to make the Priesthood of Aaron a pattern whereon to
ground Episcopacy.

That which was promis'd next, is to declare the impossibility of grounding
Evangelick government in the imitation of the Jewish Priesthood: which will be
done by considering both the quality of the persons, and the office it selfe.
Aaron and his sonnes were the Princes of their Tribe before they were sanctified
to the Priesthood: that personall eminence which they held above the other
Levites, they receav'd not only from their office, but partly brought it into
their office: and so from that time forward the Priests were not chosen out of
the whole number of the Levites, as our Bishops, but were borne inheritors of
the dignity. Therefore unlesse we shall choose our Prelats only out of the
Nobility, and let them runne in a blood, there can be no possible imitation of
Lording over their brethren in regard of their persons altogether unlike. As for
the office wch was a representation of Christs own person more immediately in
the high Priest, & of his whole priestly office in all the other; to the
performanoe of wch the Levits were but as servitors & Deacons, it was necessary
there should be a distinction of dignity betweene two functions of so great ods.
But there being no such difference among our Ministers, unlesse it be in
reference to the Deacons, it is impossible to found a Prelaty upon the imitation
of this Priesthood. For wherein, or in what worke is the office of a Prelat
excellent above that of a Pastor? in ordination you'l say; but flatly against
Scripture, for there we know Timothy receav'd ordination by the hands of the
Presbytery, notwithstanding all the vaine delusions that are us'd to evade that
testimony, and maintaine an unwarrantable usurpation. But wherefore should
ordination be a cause of setting up a superior degree in the Church? is not that
whereby Christ became our Saviour a higher and greater worke, then that whereby
he did ordaine messengers to preach and publish him our Saviour? Every Minister
sustains the person of Christ in his highest work of communicating to us the
mysteries of our salvation, and hath the power of binding and absolving, how
should he need a higher dignity to represent or execute that which is an
inferior work in Christ? why should the performance of ordination which is
a lower office exalt a Prelat, and not the seldome discharge of a higher and
more noble office wch is preaching and administring much rather depresse him?
Verily neither the nature, nor the example of ordination doth any way require an
imparity betweene the ordainer and the ordained. For what more naturall then
every like to produce his like, man to beget man, fire to propagate fire, and in
examples of highest opinion the ordainer is inferior to the ordained; for the
Pope is not made by the precedent Pope, but by Cardinals, who ordain and
consecrate to a higher and greater office then their own.

CHAP. V.

To the Arguments of B. Andrews and the Primat.

It followes here to attend to certaine objections in a little treatise lately
printed among others of like sort at Oxford, and in the title said to be out of
the rude draughts of Bishop Andrews. And surely they bee rude draughts indeed,
in so much that it is marvell to think what his friends meant to let come abroad
such shallow reasonings with the name of a man so much bruited for learning. In
the 12 and 23 pages he seemes most notoriously inconstant to himselfe; for in
the former place he tels us he forbeares to take any argument of Prelaty from
Aaron, as being the type of Christ. In the latter he can forbeare no longer, but
repents him of his rash gratuity, affirming, that to say, Christ being come in
the flesh, his figure in the high Priest ceaseth, is the shift of an Anabaptist;
and stiffly argues that Christ being as well King as Priest, was as well
fore-resembled by the Kings then, as by the high Priest. So that if his comming
take away the one type, it must also the other. Marvellous piece of divinity!
and well worth that the land should pay six thousand pound a yeare for, in
a Bishoprick, although I reade of no Sophister among the Greeks that was so
dear, neither Hippias nor Protagoras, nor any whom the Socratick schoole
famously refuted with out hire. Here we have the type of the King sow'd to the
typet of the Bishop, suttly to cast a jealousie upon the Crowne, as if the right
of Kings, like Meleager in the Metamorphosis, were no longer liv'd then the
firebrand of Prelaty. But more likely the Prelatss fearing (for their own guilty
carriage protests they doe feare) that their faire dayes cannot long hold,
practize by possessing the King with this most false doctrine, to ingage his
power for them, as in his owne quarrell, that when they fall they may fall in
a generall ruine, just as cruell Tyberius would wish,

    When I dye, let the earth be roul'd in flames. 

But where, O Bishop, doth the purpose of the law set forth Christ to us as
a King? That which never was intended in the Law, can never be abolish't as part
thereof. When the Law was made, there was no King: if before the law, or under
the law God by a speciall type in any King would foresignifie the future
kingdome of Christ, which is not yet visibly come, what was that to the law? The
whole ceremoniall law, and types can be in no law else, comprehends nothing but
the propitiatory office of Christs Priesthood, which being in substance
accomplisht, both law and Priesthood fades away of it selfe, and passes into
aire like a transitory vision, and the right of Kings neither stands by any type
nor falls. We acknowledge that the civill magistrate weares an autority of Gods
giving, and ought to be obey'd as his vicegerent. But to make a King a type, we
say is an abusive and unskilfull speech, and of a morall solidity makes it seeme
a ceremoniall shadow. Therefore your typical chaine of King and Priest must
unlink. But is not the type of Priest taken away by Christs comming? no saith
this famous Protestant Bishop of Winchester; it is not, and he that saith it is,
is an Anabaptist. What think ye Readers, do ye not understand him? What can be
gather'd hence but that the Prelat would still sacrifice? conceave him readers,
he would missificate. Their altars indeed were in a fair forwardnesse; and by
such arguments as these they were setting up the molten Calfe of their Masse
againe, and of their great Hierarch the Pope. For if the type of Priest be not
taken away, then neither of the high Priest, it were a strange beheading; and
high Priest more then one there cannot be, and that one can be no lesse then
a Pope. And this doubtlesse was the bent of his career, though never so
covertly. Yea but there was something else in the high Priest besides the
figure, as is plain by S. Pauls acknowledging him. Tis true that in the 17 of
Deut. whence this autority arises to the Priest in matters too hard for the
secular judges, as must needs be many in the occasions of those times involv'd
so with ceremoniall niceties, no wonder though it be commanded to enquire at the
mouth of the Priests, who besides the Magistrates their collegues had the Oracle
of Urim to consult with. And whether the high Priest Ananias had not incroach't
beyond the limits of his Priestly autority, or whether us'd it rightly, was no
time then for S. Paul to contest about. But if this instance be able to assert
any right of jurisdiction to the Clergy, it must impart it in common to all
Ministers, since it were a great folly to seeke for counsell in a hard intricat
scruple from a Dunce Prelat, when there might be found a speedier solution from
a grave and learned Minister, whom God hath gifted with the judgement of Urim
more amply oft-times then all the Prelates together; and now in the Gospell hath
granted the privilege of this oraculous Ephod alike to all his Ministers. The
reason therefore of imparity in the Priests, being now as is aforesaid, really
annull'd both in their person, and in their representative office, what right of
jurisdiction soever can be from this place Levitically bequeath'd, must descend
upon the Ministers of the Gospell equally, as it findes them in all other points
equall. Well then he is finally content to let Aaron go. Eleazar will serve his
turne, as being a superior of superiors, and yet no type of Christ in Aarons
life time. O thou that would'st winde into any figment, or phantasme to save thy
Miter! Yet all this will not fadge, though it be cunningly interpolisht by some
second hand with crooks & emendations; Heare then; the type of Christ in some
one particular, as of entring yearly into the Holy of holies and such like,
rested upon the High Priest only as more immediately personating our Saviour:
but to resemble his whole satisfactory office all the lineage of Aaron was no
more then sufficient. And all, or any of the Priests, consider'd separately
without relation to the highest, are but as a livelesse trunk and signfie
nothing. And this shewes the excellence of Christs sacrifice, who at once and in
one person fulfill'd that which many hunderds of Priests many times repeating
had anough to forshew. What other imparity there was among themselves, we may
safely suppose it depended on the dignity of their birth and family, together
with the circumstances of a carnall service, which might afford many priorities.
And this I take to be the summe of what the Bishop hath laid together to make
plea for Prelaty by imitation of the Law. Though indeed, if it may stand, it
will inferre Popedome all as well. Many other courses he tries, enforcing
himselfe with much ostentation of endlesse genealogies, as if he were the man
that S. Paul forewarnes us of in Timothy, but so unvigorously, that I do not
feare his winning of many to his cause, but such as doting upon great names are
either over-weake, or over sudden of faith. I shall not refuse therefore to
learne so much prudence as I finde in the Roman Souldier that attended the
crosse, not to stand breaking of legs, when the breath is quite out of the body,
but passe to that which follows. The Primat of Armagh at the beginning of his
tractat seeks to availe himselfe of that place in the 66 of Esaiah, I will take
of them for Priests and Levites, saith the Lord; to uphold hereby such a forme
of superiority among the ministers of the Gospell succeeding those in the law,
as the Lords day did the Sabbath. But certain if this method may be admitted of
interpreting those propheticall passages concerning Christian times in
a punctuall correspondence, it may with equall probability be urg'd upon us,
that we are bound to observe some monthly solemnity answerable to the new moons,
as well as the Lords day which we keepe in lieu of the Sabbath: for in the 23 v.
the Prophet joynes them in the same manner together, as before he did the
Priests and Levites, thus. And it shall come to passe that from one new moone to
another, and from one Sabbath to another shall all flesh come to worship before
me, saith the Lord. Undoubtedly with as good consequence may it be alledg'd from
hence, that we are to solemnize some religious monthly meeting different from
the Sabbath, as from the other any distinct formality of Ecclesiasticall orders
may be inferr'd. This rather will appeare to be the lawfull and unconstrain'd
sense of the text, that God in taking of them for Priests and Levites, will not
esteeme them unworthy though Gentiles, to undergoe any function in the Church,
but will make of them a full and perfect ministery, as was that of the Priests
and Levites in their kinde. And Bishop Andrews himselfe to end the controversie,
sends us a candid exposition of this quoted verse from the 24 page of his said
book, plainly deciding that God by those legall names there of Priests and
Levites means our Presbyters, and Deacons, for which either ingenuous
confession, or slip of his pen we give him thanks, and withall to him that
brought these treatises into one volume, who setting the contradictions of two
learned men so neere together, did not foresee. What other deducements or
analogies are cited out of S. Paul to prove a likenesse betweene the Ministers
of the Old and New Testament, having tri'd their sinewes I judge they may passe
without harme doing to our cause. We may remember then that Prelaty neither hath
nor can have foundation in the law, nor yet in the Gospell, which assertion as
being for the plainnesse thereof a matter of eye sight, rather then of
disquisition I voluntarily omitt, not forgetting to specifie this note againe,
that the earnest desire which the Prelates have to build their Hierarchy upon
the sandy bottome of the law, gives us to see abundantly the little assurance
which they finde to reare up their high roofs by the autority of the Gospell,
repulst as it were from the writings of the Apostles, and driven to take
sanctuary among the Jewes. Hence that open confession of the Primat before
mention'd. Episcopacy is fetcht partly from the patterne of the Old Testament,
& partly from the New as an imitation of the Old, though nothing can be more
rotten in Divinity then such a position as this, and is all one as to say
Episcopacy is partly of divine institution, and partly of mans own carving. For
who gave the autority to fetch more from the patterne of the law then what the
Apostles had already fetcht, if they fetcht any thing at all, as hath beene
prov'd they did not. So was Jereboams Episcopacy partly from the patterne of the
law, and partly from the patterne of his owne carnality; a parti-colour'd and
a parti-member'd Episcopacy, and what can this be lesse then a monstrous? Others
therefore among the Prelats perhaps not so well able to brook, or rather to
justifie this foule relapsing to the old law, have condiscended at last to
a plaine confessing that both the names and offices of Bishops and Presbyters at
first were the same, and in the Scriptures no where distinguisht. This grants
the remonstrant in the fift Section of his defence, and in the Preface to his
last short answer. But what need respect be had whether he grant or grant it
not, when as through all antiquity, and even in the loftiest times of Prelaty we
find it granted. Jerome the learned'st of the Fathers hides not his opinion,
that custome only, which the Proverbe cals a tyrant, was the maker of Prelaty;
before his audacious workmanship the Churches were rul'd in common by the
Presbyters. and such a certaine truth this was esteem'd, that it became a decree
among the Papall Canons compil'd by Gratian. Anselme also of Canturbury, who to
uphold the points of his Prelatisme made himselfe a traytor to his country, yet
commenting the Epistles to Titus and the Philippians acknowledges from the
cleernesse of the text, what Ierome and the Church Rubrick hath before
acknowledg'd. He little dreamt then that the weeding-hook of reformation would
after two ages pluck up his glorious poppy from insulting over the good corne.
Though since some of our Brittish Prelates seeing themselves prest to produce
Scripture, try all their cunning, if the New Testament will not help them, to
frame of their own heads as it were with wax a kind of Mimick Bishop limm'd out
to the life of a dead Priesthood. Or else they would straine us out a certaine
figurative Prelat, by wringing the collective allegory of those seven Angels
into seven single Rochets. Howsoever since it thus appeares that custome was the
creator of Prelaty being lesse ancient then the government of Presbyters, it is
an extreme folly to give them the hearing that tell us of Bishops through so
many ages: and if against their tedious muster of citations, Sees, and
successions, it be reply'd that wagers and Church antiquities, such as are
repugnant to the plaine dictat of Scripture are both alike the arguments of
fooles, they have their answer. We rather are to cite all those ages to an
arraignment before the word of God, wherefore, and what pretending, how
presuming they durst alter that divine institution of Presbyters, which the
Apostles who were no various and inconstant men surely had set up in the
Churches, and why they choose to live by custome and catalogue, or as S. Paul
saith by sight and visibility, rather then by faith? But first I conclude from
their owne mouthes that Gods command in Scripture, which doubtlesse ought to be
the first and greatest reason of Church-government, is wanting to Prelaty. And
certainly we have plenteous warrant in the doctrine of Christ to determine that
the want of this reason is of it selfe sufficient to confute all other presences
that may be brought in favour of it.

CHAP. VI.

That Prelaty was not set up for prevention of Schisme, as is pretended, or if it
were, that it performes not what it was first set up for, but quite the
contrary.

Yet because it hath the outside of a specious reason, & specious things we know
are aptest to worke with humane lightnesse and frailty, even against the
solidest truth, that sounds not plausibly, let us think it worth the examining
for the love of infirmer Christians, of what importance this their second reason
may be. Tradition they say hath taught them that for the prevention of growing
schisme the Bishop was heav'd above the Presbyter. And must tradition then ever
thus to the worlds end be the perpetuall canker-worme to eat out Gods
Commandements? are his decrees so inconsiderate and so fickle, that when the
statutes of Solon, or Lycurgus shall prove durably good to many ages, his in 40
yeares shall be found defective, ill contriv'd, and for needfull causes to be
alter'd? Our Saviour and his Apostles did not only foresee, but foretell and
forewarne us to looke for schisme. Is it a thing to be imagin'd of Gods wisdome,
or at least of Apostolick prudence to set up such a government in the
tendernesse of the Church, as should incline, or not be more able then any other
to oppose it selfe to schisme? it was well knowne what a bold lurker schisme was
even in the houshold of Christ betweene his owne Disciples and those of Iohn the
Baptist about fasting: and early in the Acts of the Apostles the noise of
schisme had almost drown'd the proclaiming of the Gospell; yet we reade not in
Scripture that any thought was had of making Prelates, no not in those places
where dissention was most rife. If Prelaty had beene then esteeem'd a remedy
against schisme, where was it more needfull then in that great variance among
the Corinthians which S. Paul so labour'd to reconcile? and whose eye could have
found the fittest remedy sooner then his? and what could have made the remedy
more available, then to have us'd it speedily? and lastly what could have beene
more necessary then to have written it for our instruction? yet we see he
neither commended it to us, nor us'd it himselfe. For the same division
remaining there, or else bursting forth againe more then 20 yeares after S.
Pauls death, wee finde in Clements Epistle of venerable autority written to the
yet factious Corinthians, that they were still govern'd by Presbyters. And the
same of other Churches out of Hermas, >and divers other the scholers of the
Apostles by the late industry of the learned Salmatius appeares. Neither yet did
this worthy Clement S. Pauls disciple, though writing to them to lay aside
schisme, in the least word advise them to change the Presbyteriall government
into Prelaty. And therefore if God afterward gave, or permitted this
insurrection of Episcopacy, it is to be fear'd he did it in his wrath, as he
gave the Israelites a King. With so good a will doth he use to alter his own
chosen government once establish'd. For marke whether this rare device of mans
braine thus preferr'd before the ordinance of God, had better successe then
fleshly wisdome not counseling with God is wont to have. So farre was it from
removing schisme, that if schisme parted the congregations before, now it rent
and mangl'd, now it rag'd. Heresie begat heresie with a certaine monstrous haste
of pregnancy in her birth, at once borne and bringing forth. Contentions before
brotherly were now hostile. Men went to choose their Bishop as they went to
a pitcht field, and the day of his election was like the sacking of a City,
sometimes ended with the blood of thousands. Nor this among hereticks only, but
men of the same beliefe, yea confessors, and that with such odious ambition,
that Eusebius in his eighth book testifies he abhorr'd to write. And the reason
is not obscure, for the poore dignity or rather burden of a Parochial Presbyter
could not ingage any great party, nor that to any deadly feud: but Prelaty was
a power of that extent, and sway, that if her election were popular, it was
seldome not the cause of some faction or broil in the Church. But if her dignity
came by favour of some Prince, she was from that time his creature, and
obnoxious to comply with his ends in state were they right or wrong. So that in
stead of finding Prelaty an impeacher of Schisme or faction, the more I search,
the more I grow into all perswasion to think rather that faction and she as with
a spousall ring are wedded together, never to be divorc't. But here let every
one behold the just, and dreadfull judgement of God meeting with the audacious
pride of man that durst offer to mend the ordinances of heaven. God out of the
strife of men brought forth by his Apostles to the Church that beneficent and
ever distributing office of Deacons, the stewards and Ministers of holy almes,
man out of the pretended care of peace & unity being caught in the snare of his
impious boldnesse to correct the will of Christ, brought forth to himselfe upon
the Church that irreconcileable schisme of perdition and Apostasy, the Roman
Antichrist: for that the exaltation of the Pope arose out of the reason of
Prelaty it cannot be deny'd. And as I noted before that the patterne of the High
Priest pleaded for in the Gospel (for take away the head Priest the rest are but
a carcasse) sets up with better reason a Pope, then an Archbishop, for if
Prelaty must still rise and rise till it come to a Primat, why should it stay
there? when as the catholick government is not to follow the division of
kingdomes, the temple best representing the universall Church, and the High
Priest the universall head; so I observe here, that if to quiet schisme there
must be one head of Prelaty in a land or Monarchy rising from a Provinciall to
a nationall Primacy, there may upon better grounds of repressing schisme be set
up one catholick head over the catholick Church. For the peace and good of the
Church is not terminated in the schismelesse estate of one or two kingdomes, but
should be provided for by the joynt consultation of all reformed Christendome:
that all controversie may end in the finall pronounce or canon of one
Arch-primat, or Protestant Pope. Although by this meanes for ought I see, all
the diameters of schisme may as well meet and be knit up in the center of one
grand falshood. Now let all impartiall men arbitrate what goodly inference these
two maine reasons of the Prelats have, that by a naturall league of consequence
make more for the Pope then for themselves. Yea to say more home are the very
wombe for a new subantichrist to breed in; if it be not rather the old force and
power of the same man of sin counterfeiting protestant. It was not the
prevention of schisme, but it was schisme it selfe, and the hatefull thirst of
Lording in the Church that first bestow'd a being upon Prelaty; this was the
true cause, but the pretence is stil the same. The Prelates, as they would have
it thought, are the only mawls of schisme. Forsooth if they be put downe,
a deluge of innumerable sects will follow; we shall be all Brownists, Familists,
Anabaptists. For the word Puritan seemes to be quasht, and all that heretofore
were counted such, are now Brownists. And thus doe they raise an evill report
upon the expected reforming grace that God hath bid us hope for, like those
faithlesse spies, whose carcasses shall perish in the wildernesse of their owne
confused ignorance, and never taste the good of reformation. doe they keep away
schisme? if to bring a num and chil stupidity of soul, an unactive blindnesse of
minde upon the people by their leaden doctrine, or no doctrine at all, if to
persecute all knowing and zealous Christians by the violence of their courts, be
to keep away schisme, they keep away schisme indeed; and by this kind of
discipline all Italy and Spaine is as purely and politickly kept from schisme as
England hath beene by them. With as good a plea might the dead palsie boast to
a man, tis I that free you from stitches and paines, and the troublesome feeling
of cold & heat, of wounds and stroke; if I were gone, all these would molest
you. The Winter might as well vaunt it selfe against the Spring, I destroy all
noysome and rank weeds, I keepe downe all pestilent vapours. Yes and all
wholesome herbs, and all fresh dews, by your violent & hidebound frost; but when
the gentle west winds shall open the fruitfull bosome of the earth thus
over-girded by your imprisonment, then the flowers put forth and spring, and
then the Sunne shall scatter the mists, and the manuring hand of the Tiller
shall root up all that burdens the soile without thank to your bondage. But
farre worse then any frozen captivity is the bondage of Prelates, for that
other, if it keep down any thing which is good, within the earth, so doth it
likewise that which is ill, but these let out freely the ill, and keep down the
good, or else keepe downe the lesser ill, and let out the greatest. Be asham'd
at last to tell the Parlament ye curbe Schismaticks, when as they know ye
cherish and side with Papists, and are now as it were one party with them, and
tis said they helpe to petition for ye. Can we believe that your government
strains in good earnest at the petty gnats of schisme, when as we see it makes
nothing to swallow the Camel heresie of Rome; but that indeed your throats are
of the right Pharisaical straine. Where are those schismaticks with whom the
Prelats hold such hot skirmish? shew us your acts, those glorious annals which
your Courts of loathed memory lately deceas'd have left us? those schismaticks
I doubt me wil be found the most of them such as whose only schisme was to have
spoke the truth against your high abominations and cruelties in the Church; this
is the schisme ye hate most, the removall of your criminous Hierarchy.
A politick government of yours, and of a pleasant conceit, set up to remove
those as a pretended schisme, that would remove you as a palpable heresie in
government. If the schisme would pardon ye that, she might go jagg'd in as many
cuts and slashes as she pleas'd for you. As for the rending of the Church, we
have many reasons to thinke it is not that which ye labour to prevent so much as
the rending of your pontificall sleeves: that schisme would be the sorest
schisme to you, that would be Brownisme and Anabaptisme indeed. If we go downe,
say you, as if Adrians wall were broke, a flood of sects will rush in. What
sects? What are their opinions? give us the Inventory; it will appeare both by
your former prosecutions and your present instances, that they are only such to
speake of as are offended with your lawlesse government, your ceremonies, your
Liturgy, an extract of the Masse book translated. But that they should be
contemners of publick prayer, and Churches us'd without superstition, I trust
God will manifest it ere long to be as false a slander, as your former slanders
against the Scots. Noise it till ye be hoarse; that a rabble of Sects will come
in, it will be answer'd ye, no rabble sir Priest, but a unanimous multitude of
good Protestants will then joyne to the Church, which now because of you stand
separated. This will be the dreadfull consequence of your removall. As for those
terrible names of Sectaries and Schismaticks which ye have got together, we know
your manner of fight, when the quiver of your arguments which is ever thin, and
weakly stor'd, after the first brunt is quite empty, your course is to betake ye
to your other quiver of slander, wherein lyes your best archery. And whom ye
could not move by sophisticall arguing, them you thinke to confute by scandalous
misnaming. Thereby inciting the blinder sort of people to mislike and deride
sound doctrine and good christianity under two or three vile and hatefull terms.
But if we could easily indure and dissolve your doubtiest reasons in argument,
we shall more easily beare the worst of your unreasonablenesse in calumny and
false report. Especially being fortold by Christ, that if he our Master were by
your predecessors call'd Samaritan and Belzebub, we must not think it strange if
his best Disciples in the reformation, as at first by those of your tribe they
were call'd Lollards and Hussites, so now by you be term'd Puritans, and
Brownists. But my hope is that the people of England will not suffer themselves
to be juggl'd thus out of their faith and religion by a mist of names cast
before their eyes, but will search wisely by the Scriptures, and look quite
through this fraudulent aspersion of a disgracefull name into the things
themselves: knowing that the Primitive Christians in their times were accounted
such as are now call'd Familists and Adamites, or worse. And many on the
Prelatickside like the Church of Sardis have a name to live, and yet are dead;
to be Protestants, and are indeed Papists in most of their principles. Thus
perswaded, this your old fallacy wee shall soone unmask, and quickly apprehend
how you prevent schisme, and who are your schismaticks. But what if ye prevent,
and hinder all good means of preventing schisme? that way which the Apostles
us'd, was to call a councell; from which by any thing that can be learnt from
the fifteenth of the Acts, no faithfull Christian was debarr'd, to whom
knowledge and piety might give entrance. Of such a councell as this every
parochiall Consistory is a right homogeneous and constituting part being in it
selfe as it were a little Synod, and towards a generall assembly moving upon her
own basis in an even and firme progression, as those smaller squares in battell
unite in one great cube, the main phalanx, an embleme of truth and
stedfastnesse. Whereas on the other side Prelaty ascending by a graduall
monarchy from Bishop to Arch-bishop, from thence to Primat, and from thence, for
there can be no reason yeilded neither in nature, nor in religion, wherefore, if
it have lawfully mounted thus high, it should not be a Lordly ascendent in the
horoscope of the Church, from Primate to Patriarch, and so to Pope. I say
Prelaty thus ascending in a continuall pyramid upon pretence to perfect the
Churches unity, if notwithstanding it be found most needfull, yea the utmost
helpe to dearn up the rents of schisme by calling a councell, what does it but
teach us that Prelaty is of no force to effect this work which she boasts to be
her maister-peice; and that her pyramid aspires and sharpens to ambition, not to
perfection, or unity. This we know, that as often as any great schisme disparts
the Church, and Synonds be proclam'd, the Presbyters have as great right there,
and as free vote of old, as the Bishops, which the Canon law conceals not. So
that Prelaty if she will seek to close up divisions in the Church, must be
forc't to dissolve, and unmake her own pyramidal figure, which she affirmes to
be of such uniting power, when as indeed it is the most dividing and
schismaticall forme that Geometricians know of, and must be faine to inglobe, or
incube her selfe among the Presbyters; which she hating to do, sends her haughty
Prelates from all parts with their forked Miters, the badge of schisme or the
stampe of his cloven foot whom they serve I think, who according to their
hierarchies acuminating still higher and higher in a cone of Prelaty, in stead
of healing up the gashes of the Church, as it happens in such pointed bodies
meeting, fall to gore one another with their sharpe spires for upper place, and
precedence, till the councell it selfe prove the greatest schisme of all. And
thus they are so farre from hindring dissension, that they have made
unprofitable, and even noysome the chiefest remedy we have to keep Christendom
at one, which is by councels: and these if wee rightly consider Apostolick
example, are nothing else but generall Presbyteries. This seem'd so farre from
the Apostles to think much of, as if hereby their dignity were impair'd, that,
as we may gather by those Epistles of Peter and Iohn, which are likely to be
latest written when the Church grew to a setling, like those heroick patricians
of Rome (if we may use such comparison) hasting to lay downe their dictatorship,
they rejoys't to call themselves and to be as fellow Elders among their
brethren. Knowing that their high office was but as the scaffolding of the
Church yet unbuilt, and would be but a troublesome disfigurement, so soone as
the building was finisht. But the lofty minds of an age or two after, such was
their small discerning, thought it a poore indignity, that the high rear'd
government of the Church should so on a sudden, as it seem'd to them, squat into
a Presbytery. Next or rather before councels the timeliest prevention of schisme
is to preach the Gospell abundantly and powerfully throughout all the land, to
instruct the youth religiously, to endeavour how the Scriptures may be easiest
understood by all men; to all which the proceedings of these men have been on
set purpose contrary. But how O Prelats should you remove schisme, and how
should you not remove and oppose all the meanes of removing schism? when Prelaty
is a schisme it selfe from the most reformed and most flourishing of our
neighbour Churches abroad, and a sad subject of discord and offence to the whole
nation at home. The remedy which you alledge is the very disease we groan under;
and never can be to us a remedy but by removing it selfe. Your predecessors were
believ'd to assume this preeminence above their brethren only that they might
appease dissention. Now God and the Church cals upon you, for the same reason to
lay it down, as being to thousands of good men offensive, burdensome,
intolerable. Surrender that pledge which unlesse you fowlely usurpt it, the
Church gave you, and now claimes it againe, for the reason she first lent it.
Discharge the trust committed to you, prevent schisme, and that ye can never do,
but by discharging your selves. That government which ye hold, we confesse
prevents much, hinders much, removes much; but what? the schisms and grievances
of the Church? no, but all the peace and unity, all the welfare not of the
Church alone, but of the whole kingdome. And if it be still permitted ye to
hold, will cause the most sad I know not whether separation be enough to say,
but such a wide gulph of distraction in this land as will never close her
dismall gap, untill ye be forc't (for of your selvs ye wil never do as that
Roman Curtius nobly did) for the Churches peace & your countries, to leap into
the midst, and be no more seen. By this we shal know whether yours be that
ancient Prelaty which you say was first constituted for the reducement of quiet
& unanimity into the Church, for then you wil not delay to prefer that above
your own preferment. If otherwise, we must be confident that your Prelaty is
nothing else but your ambition, an insolent preferring of your selves above your
brethren, and all your learned scraping in antiquity even to disturbe the bones
of old Aaron and his sonnes in their graves, is but to maintain and set upon our
necks a stately and severe dignity, which you call sacred, and is nothing in
very deed but a grave and reverent gluttony, a sanctimonious avarice, in
comparison of which, all the duties and dearnesses which ye owe to God or to his
Church, to law, custome, or nature, ye have resolv'd to set at nought. I could
put you in mind what counsell Clement a fellow labourer with the Apostles gave
to the Presbyters of Corinth, whom the people though unjustly sought to remove.
Who among you saith he, is noble minded, who is pittifull, who is charitable,
let him say thus, if for me this sedition, this enmity, these differences be,
I willingly depart, I go my wayes, only let the flock of Christ be at peace with
the Presbyters that are set over it. He that shall do this, saith he, shall get
him great honour in the Lord, and all places will receave him. This was Clements
counsell to good and holy men that they should depart rather from their just
office, then by their stay, to ravle out the seamlesse garment of concord in the
Church. But I have better counsell to give the Prelats, and farre more
acceptable to their eares, this advice in my opinion is fitter for them. Cling
fast to your Pontificall Sees, bate not, quit your selves like Barons, stand to
the utmost for your haughty Courts and votes in Parliament. Still tell us that
you prevent schisme, though schisme and combustion be the very issue of your
bodies, your first born; and set your country a bleeding in a Prelaticall
mutiny, to fight for your pompe, and that ill favour'd weed of temporall honour
that sits dishonourably upon your laick shoulders, that ye may be fat and
fleshy, swoln with high thoughts and big with mischievous designes, when God
comes to visit upon you all this forescore yeares vexation of his Church under
your Egyptian tyranny. For certainly of all those blessed soules which you have
persecuted, and those miserable ones which you have lost, the just vengeance
does not sleepe.

CHAP. VII.

That those many Sects and schismes by some suppos'd to be among us, and that
rebellion in Ireland, ought not to be a hindrance, but a hastning of
reformation.

As for those many Sects and divisions rumor'd abroad to be amongst us, it is not
hard to perceave that they are partly the meere fictions and false alarmes of
the Prelates, thereby to cast amazements and panick terrors into the hearts of
weaker Christians that they should not venture to change the present deformity
of the Church for fear of I know not what worse inconveniencies. With the same
objected feares and suspicions, we know that suttle Prelat Gardner sought to
divert the first reformation. It may suffice us to be taught by S. Paul that
there must be sects for the manifesting of those that are sound hearted. These
are but winds and flaws to try the floting vessell of our faith whether it be
stanch and sayl well, whether our ballast be just, our anchorage and cable
strong. By this is seene who lives by faith and certain knowledge, and who by
credulity and the prevailing opinion of the age; whose vertue is of an
unchangeable graine, and whose of a slight wash. If God come to trie our
constancy we ought not to shrink, or stand the lesse firmly for that, but passe
on with more stedfast resolution to establish the truth though it were through
a lane of sects and heresies on each side. Other things men do to the glory of
God: but sects and errors it seems God suffers to be for the glory of good men,
that the world may know and reverence their true fortitude and undaunted
constancy in the truth. Let us not therefore make these things an incumbrance,
or an excuse of our delay in reforming, which God sends us as an incitement to
proceed with more honour and alacrity. For if there were no opposition where
were the triall of an unfained goodnesse and magnanimity? vertue that wavers is
not vertue, but vice revolted from it selfe, and after a while returning. The
actions of just and pious men do not darken in their middle course; but Solomon
tels us they are as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the
perfet day. But if we shall suffer the trifling doubts and jealousies of future
sects to overcloud the faire beginnings of purpos'st reformation, let us rather
fear that another proverb of the same Wiseman be not upraided to us, that the
way of the wicked is as darknesse, they stumble at they know not what. If sects
and schismes be turbulent in the unsetl'd estate of a Church, while it lies
under the amending hand, it best beseems our Christian courage to think they are
but as the throws and pangs that go before the birth of reformation, and that
the work it selfe is now in doing. For if we look but in the nature of
elementall and mixt things, we know they cannot suffer any change of one kind,
or quality into another without the struggl of contrarieties. And in things
artificiall, seldome any elegance is wrought without a superfluous wast and
refuse in the transaction. No Marble statue can be politely carv'd, no fair
edifice built without almost as much rubbish and sweeping. Insomuch that even in
the spirituall conflict of S. Pauls conversion there fell scales from his eyes
that were not perceav'd before. No wonder then in the reforming of a Church
which is never brought to effect without the fierce encounter of truth and
falshood together, if, as it were the splinters and shares of so violent
a jousting, there fall from between the shock many fond errors and fanatick
opinions, which when truth has the upper hand, and the reformation shall be
perfeted, will easily be rid out of the way, or kept so low, as that they shall
be only the exercise of our knowledge, not the disturbance, or interruption of
our faith. As for that which Barclay >in his image of minds writes concerning
the horrible and barbarous conceits of Englishmen in their religion. I deeme it
spoken like what hee was, a fugitive Papist traducing the Iland whence he
sprung. It may be more judiciously gather'd from hence, that the Englishman of
many other nations is least atheisticall, and bears a naturall disposition of
much reverence and awe towards the Deity; but in his weaknesse and want of
better instruction, which among us too frequently is neglected, especially by
the meaner sort, turning the bent of his own wits with a scrupulous and
ceaselesse care what he might do to informe himselfe aright of God and his
worship, he may fall not unlikely sometimes as any otherland man into an uncouth
opinion. And verily if we look at his native towardlinesse in the roughcast
without breeding, some nation or other may haply be better compos'd to
a naturall civility, and right judgement then he. But if he get the benefit once
of a wise and well rectifi'd nurture, which must first come in generall from the
godly vigilance of the Church, I suppose that where ever mention is made of
countries manners, or men, the English people among the first that shall be
prais'd, may deserve to be accounted a right pious, right honest, and right
hardy nation. But thus while some stand dallying and deferring to reform for
fear of that which should mainly hasten them forward, lest schism and error
should encrease, we may now thank our selves and our delayes if instead of
schism a bloody and inhumane rebellion be strook in between our slow movings.
Indeed against violent and powerfull opposition there can be no just blame of
a lingring dispatch. But this I urge against those that discourse it for
a maxim, as if the swift opportunities of establishing, or reforming religion,
were to attend upon the fleam of state businesse. In state many things at first
are crude and hard to digest, which only time and deliberation can supple, and
concoct. But in religion wherein is no immaturity, nothing out of season, it
goes farre otherwise. The doore of grace turnes upon smooth hinges wide opening
to send out, but soon shutting to recall the precious offers of mercy to
a nation: which unlesse Watchfulnesse and Zeale two quick-sighted and
ready-handed Virgins be there in our behalfe to receave, we loose: and still the
ofter we loose, the straiter the doore opens, and the lesse is offer'd. This is
all we get by demurring in Gods service. Tis not rebellion that ought to be the
hindrance of reformation, but it is the want of this which is the cause of that.
The Prelats which boast themselves the only bridlers of schisme God knows have
been so cold and backward both there and with us to represse heresie and
idolatry, that either through their carelessenesse or their craft all this
mischiefe is befaln. What can the Irish subject do lesse in Gods just
displeasure against us, then revenge upon English bodies the little care that
our Prelats have had of their souls. Nor hath their negligence been new in that
Iland but ever notorious in Queen Elizabeths dayes, as Camden their known friend
forbears not to complain. Yet so little are they toucht with remorce of these
their cruelties, for these cruelties are theirs, the bloody revenge of those
souls which they have famisht, that whenas against our brethren the Scots, who
by their upright and loyall deeds have now bought themselves an honourable name
to posterity, whatsoever malice by slander could invent, rage in hostility
attempt, they greedily attempted, toward these murdrous Irish the enemies of God
and mankind, a cursed off-spring of their own connivence, no man takes notice
but that they seeme to be very calmely and indifferently affected. Where then
should we begin to extinguish a rebellion that hath his cause from the
mis-government of the Church, where? but at the Churches reformation, and the
removall of that government which persues and warres with all good Christians
under the name of schismaticks, but maintains and fosters all Papists and
Idolaters as tolerable Christians. And if the sacred Bible may be our light, we
are neither without example, nor the witnesse of God himselfe, that the
corrupted estate of the Church is both the cause of tumult, and civill warres,
and that to stint them, the peace of the Church must first be setl'd. Now for
a long season, saith Azariah to King Asa, Israel hath beene without the true
God, and without a teaching Priest, and without law: and in those times there
was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations
were upon all the inhabitants of the countries. And nation was destroy'd of
nation, and City of City, for God did vex them with all adversity. Be ye strong
therefore, saith he to the reformers of that age, and let not your hands be
weake, for your worke shall bee rewarded. And in those Prophets that liv'd in
the times of reformation after the Captivity often doth God stirre up the people
to consider that while establishment of Church matters was neglected, and put
off, there was no peace to him that went out or came in, for I, saith God, had
set all men every one against his neighbour. But from the very day forward that
they went seriously, and effectually about the welfare of the Church, he tels
them that they themselves might perceave the sudden change of things into
a prosperous and peacefull condition. But it will here be said that the
reformation is a long work, and the miseries of Ireland are urgent of a speedy
redresse. They be indeed; and how speedy we are, the poore afflicted remnant of
our martyr'd countrymen that sit there on the Sea-shore, counting the houres of
our delay with their sighs, and the minuts with their falling teares, perhaps
with the destilling of their bloody wounds, if they have not quite by this time
cast off, and almost curst the vain hope of our founder'd ships, and aids, can
best judge how speedy we are to their reliefe. But let their succors be hasted,
as all need and reason is, and let not therefore the reformation which is the
chiefest cause of successe and victory be still procrastinated. They of the
captivity in their greatest extremities could find both counsell and hands
anough at once to build, and to expect the enemies assault. And we for our parts
a populous and mighty nation must needs be faln into a strange plight either of
effeminacy, or confusion, if Ireland that was once the conquest of one single
Earle with his privat forces, and the small assistance of a petty Kernish
Prince, should not take up all the wisdome and prowesse of this potent Monarchy
to quell a barbarous crew of rebels, whom if we take but the right course to
subdue, that is beginning at the reformation of our Church, their own horrid
murders and rapes will so fight against them, that the very sutlers and horse
boyes of the Campe will be able to rout and chase them without the staining of
any Noble sword. To proceed by other method in this enterprize, be our Captains
and Commanders never so expert, will be as great an error in the art of warre,
as any novice in souldiership ever committed. And thus I leave it as a declared
truth, that neither the feare of sects no nor rebellion can be a fit plea to
stay reformation, but rather to push it forward with all possible diligence and
speed. The Reason of Church Government Urg'd Against Prelaty

THE PREFACE.

In the publishing of humane lawes, which for the most part aime not beyond the
good of civill society, to set them barely forth to the people without reason or
Preface, like a physicall prescript, or only with threatnings, as it were
a lordly command, in the judgement of Plato was thought to be done neither
generously nor wisely. His advice was, seeing that persuasion certainly is
a more winning, and more manlike way to keepe men in obedience then feare, that
to such lawes as were of principall moment, there should be us'd as an
induction, some well temper'd discourse, shewing how good, how gainfull, how
happy it must needs be to live according to honesty and justice, which being
utter'd with those native colours and graces of speech, as true eloquence the
daughter of vertue can best bestow upon her mothers praises, would so incite,
and in a manner, charme the multitude into the love of that which is really
good, as to imbrace it ever after, not of custome and awe, which most men do,
but of choice and purpose, with true and constant delight. But this practice we
may learn, from a better & more ancient authority, then any heathen writer hath
to give us, and indeed being a point of so high wisdome & worth, how could it be
but we should find it in that book, within whose sacred context all wisdome is
infolded? Moses therefore the only Lawgiver that we can believe to have beene
visibly taught of God, knowing how vaine it was to write lawes to men whose
hearts were not first season'd with the knowledge of God and of his workes,
began from the book of Genesis, as a prologue to his lawes; which Josephus right
well hath noted. That the nation of the Jewes, reading therein the universall
goodnesse of God to all creatures in the Creation, and his peculiar favour to
them in his election of Abraham their ancestor, from whom they could derive so
many blessings upon themselves, might be mov'd to obey sincerely by knowing so
good a reason of their obedience. If then in the administration of civill
justice, and under the obscurity of Ceremoniall rites, such care was had by the
wisest of the heathen, and by Moses among the Jewes, to instruct them at least
in a generall reason of that government to which their subjection was requir'd,
how much more ought the members of the Church under the Gospell seeke to their
understanding in the reason of that government which the Church claimes to have
over them: especially for that the Church hath in her immediate cure those inner
parts and affections of the mind where the seat of reason is; having power to
examine our spirituall knowledge, and to demand from us in Gods behalfe
a service intirely reasonable. But because about the manner and order of this
government, whether it ought to be Presbyteriall, or Prelaticall, such endlesse
question, or rather uproare is arisen in this land, as may be justly term'd,
what the feaver is to the Physitians, the eternall reproach of our Divines;
whilest other profound Clerks of late greatly, as they conceive, to the
advancement of Prelaty, are so earnestly meting out the Lydian proconsular Asia,
to make good the prime metropolis of Ephesus, as if some of our Prelates in all
haste meant to change their soile, and become neighbours to the English Bishop
of Chalcedon; and whilest good Breerwood as busily bestirres himselfe in our
vulgar tongue to divide precisely the three Patriarchats, of Rome, Alexandria,
and Antioch, and whether to any of these England doth belong, I shall in the
meane while not cease to hope through the mercy and grace of Christ, the head
and husband of his Church, that England shortly is to belong, neither to See
Patriarchall, nor See Prelaticall, but to the faithfull feeding and disciplining
of that ministeriall order, which the blessed Apostles constituted throughout
the Churches: and this I shall assay to prove can be no other, then that of
Presbyters and Deacons. And if any man incline to thinke I undertake a taske too
difficult for my yeares, I trust through the supreme inlightning assistance
farre otherwise; for my yeares, be they few or many, what imports it? So they
bring reason, let that be lookt on: and for the task, from hence that the
question in hand is so needfull to be known at this time chiefly by every meaner
capacity, and containes in it the explication of many admirable and heavenly
privileges reacht out to us by the Gospell, I conclude the task must be easie.
God having to this end ordain'd his Gospell to be the revelation of his power
and wisdome in Christ Jesus. And this is one depth of his wisdome, that he could
so plainly reveale so great a measure of it to the grosse distorted apprehension
of decay'd mankinde. Let others therefore dread and shun the Scriptures for
their darknesse, I shall wish I may deserve to be reckon'd among those who
admire and dwell upon them for their clearnesse. And this seemes to be the cause
why in those places of holy writ, wherein is treated of Church-government, the
reasons thereof are not formally, and profestly set downe, because to him that
heeds attentively the drift and scope of Christian profession, they easily imply
themselves, which thing further to explane, having now prefac'd enough, I shall
no longer deferre.

CHAP. I.

That Church-governement is prescrib'd in the Gospell, and that to say otherwise
is unsound.

The first and greatest reason of Church-government, we may securely with the
assent of many on the adverse part, affirme to be, because we finde it so
ordain'd and set out to us by the appointment of God in the Scriptures; but
whether this be Presbyteriall, or Prelaticall, it cannot be brought to the
scanning, untill I have said what is meet to some who do not think it for the
ease of their inconsequent opinions, to grant that Church discipline is
platform'd in the Bible, but that it is left to the discretion of men. To this
conceit of theirs I answer, that it is both unsound and untrue. For there is not
that thing in the world of more grave and urgent importance throughout the whole
life of man, then is discipline. What need I instance? He that hath read with
judgement, of Nations and Commonwealths, of Cities and Camps, of peace and
warre, sea and land, will readily agree that the flourishing and decaying of all
civill societies, all the moments and turnings of humane occasions are mov'd to
and fro as upon the axle of discipline. So that whatsoever power or sway in
mortall things weaker men have attributed to fortune, I durst with more
confidence (the honour of divine providence ever sav'd) ascribe either to the
vigor, or the slacknesse of discipline. Nor is there any sociable perfection in
this life civill or sacred that can be above discipline, but she is that which
with her musicall cords preserves and holds all the parts thereof together.
Hence in those perfect armies of Cyrus in Xenophon, and Scipio in the Roman
stories, the excellence of military skill was esteem'd, not by the not needing,
but by the readiest submitting to the edicts of their commander. And certainly
discipline is not only the removall of disorder, but if any visible shape can be
given to divine things, the very visible shape and image of vertue, whereby she
is not only seene in the regular gestures and motions of her heavenly paces as
she walkes, but also makes the harmony of her voice audible to mortall eares.
Yea the Angels themselves, in whom no disorder is fear'd, as the Apostle that
saw them in his rapture describes, are distinguisht and quaterniond into their
celestiall Princedomes, and Satrapies, according as God himselfe hath writ his
imperiall decrees through the great provinces of heav'n. The state also of the
blessed in Paradise, though never so perfect, is not therefore left without
discipline, whose golden survaying reed marks out and measures every quarter and
circuit of new Jerusalem. Yet is it not to be conceiv'd that those eternall
effluences of sanctity and love in the glorified Saints should by this meanes be
confin'd and cloy'd with repetition of that which is prescrib'd, but that our
happinesse may orbe it selfe into a thousand vagancies of glory and delight, and
with a kinde of eccentricall equation be as it were an invariable Planet of joy
and felicity, how much lesse can we believe that God would leave his fraile and
feeble, though not lesse beloved Church here below to the perpetuall stumble of
conjecture and disturbance in this our darke voyage without the card and
compasse of Discipline. Which is so hard to be of mans making, that we may see
even in the guidance of a civill state to worldly happinesse, it is not for
every learned, or every wise man, though many of them consult in common, to
invent or frame a discipline, but if it be at all the worke of man, it must be
of such a one as is a true knower of himselfe, and himselfe in whom
contemplation and practice, wit, prudence, fortitude, and eloquence must be
rarely met, both to comprehend the hidden causes of things, and span in his
thoughts all the various effects that passion or complexion can worke in mans
nature; and hereto must his hand be at defiance with gaine, and his heart in all
vertues heroick. So far is it from the kenne of these wretched projectors of
ours that bescraull their Pamflets every day with new formes of government for
our Church. And therefore all the ancient lawgivers were either truly inspir'd
as Moses, or were such men as with authority anough might give it out to be so,
as Minos, Lycurgus, Numa, because they wisely forethought that men would never
quietly submit to such a discipline as had not more of Gods hand in it then
mans. To come within the narrownesse of houshold government, observation will
shew us many deepe counsellers of state and judges to demean themselves
incorruptly in the setl'd course of affaires, and many worthy Preachers upright
in their lives, powerfull in their audience; but look upon either of these men
where they are left to their own disciplining at home, and you shall soone
perceive for all their single knowledge and uprightnesse, how deficient they are
in the regulating of their own family; not only in what may concerne the
vertuous and decent composure of their minds in their severall places, but that
which is of a lower and easier performance, the right possessing of the outward
vessell, their body, in health or sicknesse, rest or labour, diet, or
abstinence, whereby to render it more pliant to the soule, and usefull to the
Common-wealth: which if men were but as good to discipline themselves, as some
are to tutor their Horses and Hawks, it could not be so grosse in most
housholds. If then it appear so hard and so little knowne, how to governe
a house well, which is thought of so easie discharge, and for every mans
undertaking, what skill of man, what wisdome, what parts, can be sufficient to
give lawes & ordinances to the elect houshold of God? If we could imagine that
he had left it at randome without his provident and gracious ordering, who is he
so arrogant so presumptuous that durst dispose and guide the living arke of the
holy Ghost, though he should finde it wandring in the field of Bethshemesh,
without the conscious warrant of some high calling. But no profane insolence can
paralell that which our Prelates dare avouch, to drive outragiously, and shatter
the holy arke of the Church, not born upon their shoulders with pains and labour
in the word, but drawne with rude oxen their officials, and their owne brute
inventions. Let them make shewes of reforming while they will, so long as the
Church is mounted upon the Prelaticall Cart, and not as it ought betweene the
hands of the Ministers, it will but shake and totter, and he that sets to his
hand though with a good intent to hinder the shogging of it, in this unlawfull
waggonry wherein it rides, let him beware it be not fatall to him as it was to
Uzza. Certainly if God be the father of his family the Church, wherein could he
expresse that name more, then in training it up under his owne all-wise and dear
Oeconomy, not turning it loose to the havock of strangers and wolves that would
ask no better plea then this to doe in the Church of Christ, what ever humour
faction, policy, or licentious will would prompt them to. Againe, if Christ be
the Churches husband expecting her to be presented before him a pure unspotted
virgin; in what could he shew his tender love to her more, then in prescribing
his owne wayes which he best knew would be to the improvement of her health and
beauty with much greater care doubtlesse then the Persian King could appoint for
his Queene Esther those maiden dietings & set prescriptions of baths, & odors,
which may render her at last the more amiable to his eye. For of any age or sex,
most unfitly may a virgin be left to an uncertaine and arbitrary education. Yea
though she be well instructed, yet is she still under a more strait tuition,
especially if betroth'd. In like manner the Church bearing the same resemblance,
it were not reason to think she should be left destitute of that care which is
as necessary, and proper to her, as instruction. For publick preaching indeed is
the gift of the Spirit working as best seemes to his secret will, but discipline
is the practick work of preaching directed and apply'd as is most requisite to
particular duty; without which it were all one to the benefit of souls, as it
would be to the cure of bodies, if all the Physitians in London should get into
the severall Pulpits of the City, and assembling all the diseased in every
parish should begin a learned Lecture of Pleurisies, Palsies, Lethargies, to
which perhaps none there present were inclin'd, and so without so much as
feeling one puls, or giving the least order to any skilfull Apothecary, should
dismisse 'em from time to time, some groaning, some languishing, some expiring,
with this only charge to look well to themselves, and do as they heare. Of what
excellence and necessity then Church-discipline is, how beyond the faculty of
man to frame, and how dangerous to be left to mans invention who would be every
foot turning it to sinister ends, how properly also it is the worke of God as
father, and of Christ as Husband of the Church; we have by thus much heard.

CHAP. II.

That Church governement is set downe in holy Scripture, and that to say
otherwise is untrue.

As therefore it is unsound to say that God hath not appointed any set government
in his Church, so is it untrue. Of the time of the Law there can be no doubt;
for to let passe the first institution of Priests and Levites, which is too
cleare to be insisted upon, when the Temple came to be built, which in plaine
judgement could breed no essentiall change either in religion, or in the
Priestly government; yet God to shew how little he could endure that men should
be tampring and contriving in his worship, though in things of lesse regard,
gave to David for Solomon not only a pattern and modell of the Temple, but
a direction for the courses of the Priests and Levites, and for all the worke of
their service. At the returne from the Captivity things were only restor'd after
the ordinance of Moses and David; or if the least alteration be to be found,
they had with them inspired men, Prophets, and it were not sober to say they did
ought of moment without divine intimation. In the Prophesie of Ez-kiel from the
40 Chapt. onward, after the destruction of the Temple, God by his Prophet
seeking to weane the hearts of the Jewes from their old law to expect a new and
more perfect reformation under Christ, sets out before their eyes the stately
fabrick & constitution of his Church, with al the ecclesiasticall functions
appertaining; indeed the description is as sorted best to the apprehension of
those times, typicall and shadowie, but in such manner as never yet came to
passe, nor never must literally, unlesse we mean to annihilat the Gospel. But so
exquisit and lively the description is in portraying the new state of the
Church, and especially in those points where government seemes to be most
active, that both Jewes and Gentiles might have good cause to be assur'd, that
God when ever he meant to reforme his Church, never intended to leave the
governement thereof delineated here in such curious architecture, to be patch't
afterwards, and varnish't over with the devices and imbellishings of mans
imagination. Did God take such delight in measuring out the pillars, arches, and
doores of a materiall Temple, was he so punctuall and circumspect in lavers,
altars, and sacrifices soone after to be abrogated, lest any of these should
have beene made contrary to his minde? is not a farre more perfect worke more
agreeable to his perfection in the most perfect state of the Church militant,
the new alliance of God to man? should not he rather now by his owne prescribed
discipline have cast his line and levell upon the soule of man which is his
rationall temple, and by the divine square and compasse thereof forme and
regenerate in us the lovely shapes of vertues and graces, the sooner to edifie
and accomplish that immortall stature of Christs body which is his Church, in
all her glorious lineaments and proportions. And that this indeed God hath done
for us in the Gospel we shall see with open eyes, not under a vaile. We may
passe over the history of the Acts and other places, turning only to those
Epistles of S. Paul to Timothy and Titus: where the spirituall eye may discerne
more goodly and gracefully erected then all the magnificence of Temple or
Tabernacle, such a heavenly structure of evangelick discipline so diffusive of
knowledge and charity to the prosperous increase and growth of the Church, that
it cannot be wonder'd if that elegant and artfull symmetry of the promised new
temple in Ezekiel, and all those sumptuous things under the Law were made to
signifie the inward beauty and splendor of the Christian Church thus govern'd.
And whether this be commanded let it now be judg'd. S. Paul after his preface to
the first of Timothy which hee concludes in the 17 Verse with Amen, enters upon
the subject of his Epistle which is to establish the Church-government with
a command. This charge I commit to thee son Timothy: according to the prophecies
which went before on thee, that thou by them might'st war a good warfare. Which
is plain enough thus expounded. This charge I commit to thee wherein I now go
about to instruct thee how thou shalt set up Church-discipline, that thou
might'st warre a good warfare, bearing thy selfe constantly and faithfully in
the Ministery, which in the I to the Corinthians is also call'd a warfare: and
so after a kinde of Parenthesis concerning Hymenæus he returnes to his command
though under the milde word of exhorting, Cap.2.v.I. I exhort therefore. As if
he had interrupted his former command by the occasionall mention of Hymenaeus.
More beneath in the 14 V. of the 3 C. when he hath deliver'd the duties of
Bishops or Presbyters and Deacons not once naming any other order in the Church,
he thus addes. These things write I unto thee hoping to come unto thee shortly
(such necessity it seems there was) but if I tarry long, that thou mai'st know
how thou ought'st to behave thy selfe in the house of God. From this place it
may be justly ask't, whether Timothy by this here written might know what was to
be knowne concerning the orders of Church governours or no? If he might, then in
such a cleere text as this may we know too without further jangle; if he might
not, then did S. Paul write insufficiently, and moreover said not true, for he
saith here he might know, and I perswade my selfe he did know ere this was
written, but that the Apostle had more regard to the instruction of us, then to
the informing of him. In the fifth Chap. after some other Church precepts
concerning discipline, mark what a dreadfull command followes, Verse 21.
I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that
thou observe these things, and as if all were not yet sure anough, he closes up
the Epistle with an adjuring charge thus. I give thee charge in the sight of God
who quickneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, that thou keepe this
commandement: that is the whole commandement concerning discipline, being the
maine purpose of the Epistle: although Hooker would faine have this denouncement
referr'd to the particular precept going before, because the word Commandement
is in the singular number, not remembring that even in the first Chapt. of this
Epistle, the word Commandement is us'd in a plurall sense, Vers. 5. Now the end
of the Commandement is charity. And what more frequent then in like manner to
say the Law of Moses. So that either to restraine the significance too much, or
too much to inlarg it would make the adjuration either not so waighty, or not so
pertinent. And thus we find here that the rules of Church-discipline are not
only commanded, but hedg'd about with such a terrible impalement of commands, as
he that will break through wilfully to violate the least of them, must hazard
the wounding of his conscience even to death. Yet all of this notwithstanding we
shall finde them broken wellnigh all by the faire pretenders even of the next
ages. No lesse to the contempt of him whom they fain to be the archfounder of
prelaty S. Peter, who by what he writes in the 5 Chap. of his first Epistle
should seeme to be farre another man then tradition reports him: there he
commits to the Presbyters only full authority both of feeding the flock, and
Episcopating: and commands that obedience be given to them as to the mighty hand
of God, wch is his mighty ordinance. Yet all this was as nothing to repell the
ventrous boldnesse of innovation that ensu'd, changing the decrees of God that
is immutable, as if they had been breath'd by man. Neverthelesse when Christ by
those visions of S. John foreshewes the reformation of his Church, he bids him
take his Reed and meet it out againe after the first patterne, for he prescribes
him no other. Arise, said the Angell, and measure the Temple of God and the
Altar, and them that worship therein. What is there in the world can measure men
but discipline? Our word ruling imports no lesse. Doctrine indeed is the
measure, or at least the reason of the measure, tis true, but unlesse the
measure be apply'd to that which it is to measure, how can it actually doe its
proper worke. Whether therefore discipline be all one with doctrine, or the
particular application thereof to this or that person, we all agree that
doctrine must be such only as is commanded; or whether it be something really
differing from doctrine, yet was it only of Gods appointment, as being the most
adequat measure of the Church and her children, which is here the office of
a great Evangelist and the reed given him from heaven. But that part of the
Temple which is not thus measur'd, so farre is it from being in Gods tuition or
delight, that in the following verse he rejects it, however in shew and
visibility it may seeme a part of his Church, yet in as much as it lyes thus
unmeasur'd he leaves it to be trampl'd by the Gentiles, that is to be polluted
with idolatrous and Gentilish rites and ceremonies. And that the principall
reformation here foretold is already come to passe as well in discipline as in
doctrine the state of our neighbour Churches afford us to behold. Thus through
all the periods and changes of the Church it hath beene prov'd that God hath
still reserv'd to himselfe the right of enacting Church-government.

CHAP. III.

That it is dangerous and unworthy the Gospell to hold that Church-government is
to be pattern'd by the Law, as B. Andrews and the Primat of Armagh maintaine.

We may returne now from this interposing difficulty thus remov'd, to affirme,
that since Church-government is so strictly commanded in Gods Word, the first
and greatest reason why we should submit thereto, is because God hath so
commanded. But whether of these two, Prelaty or Presbytery can prove it selfe to
be supported by this first and greatest reason, must be the next dispute.
Wherein this position is to be first layd down as granted; that I may not follow
a chase rather then an argument, that one of these two, and none other is of
Gods ordaining, and if it be, that ordinance must be evident in the Gospell. For
the imperfect and obscure institution of the Law, which the Apostles themselves
doubt not oft-times to vilifie, cannot give rules to the compleat and glorious
ministration of the Gospell, which lookes on the Law, as on a childe, not as on
a tutor. And that the Prelates have no sure foundation in the Gospell, their own
guiltinesse doth manifest: they would not else run questing up as high as Adam
to fetch their originall, as tis said one of them lately did in publick. To
which assertion, had I heard it, because I see they are so insatiable of
antiquity, I should have gladly assented, and confest them yet more ancient. For
Lucifer before Adam was the first prelat Angel, and both he, as is commonly
thought, and our forefather Adam, as we all know, for aspiring above their
orders, were miserably degraded. But others better advis'd are content to
receive their beginning from Aaron and his sons, among whom B. Andrews of late
yeares, and in these times the Primat of Armagh for their learning are reputed
the best able to say what may be said in this opinion. The Primat in his
discourse about the originall of Episcopacy newly revis'd begins thus. The
ground of Episcopacy is fetcht partly from the pattern prescrib'd by God in the
Old Testament, and partly from the imitation thereof brought in by the Apostles.
Herein I must entreat to be excus'd of the desire I have to be satisfi'd, how
for example the ground of Episcop. is fetch't partly from the example of the old
Testament, by whom next, and by whose authority. Secondly, how the
Church-government under the Gospell can be rightly call'd an imitation of that
in the old Testament? for that the Gospell is the end and fulfilling of the Law,
our liberty also from the bondage of the Law I plainly reade. How then the ripe
age of the Gospell should be put to schoole againe, and learn to governe her
selfe from the infancy of the Law, the stronger to imitate the weaker, the
freeman to follow the captive, the learned to be lesson'd by the rude, will be
a hard undertaking to evince from any of those principles which either art or
inspiration hath written. If any thing done by the Apostles may be drawne
howsoever to a likenesse of something Mosaicall, if it cannot be prov'd that it
was done of purpose in imitation, as having the right thereof grounded in
nature, and not in ceremony or type, it will little availe the matter. The whole
Judaick law is either politicall, and to take pattern by that, no Christian
nation ever thought it selfe oblig'd in conscience; or morall, which containes
in it the observation of whatsoever is substantially, and perpetually true and
good, either in religion, or course of life. That which is thus morall, besides
what we fetch from those unwritten lawes and Ideas which nature hath ingraven in
us, the Gospell, as stands with her dignity most, lectures to us from her own
authentick hand-writing and command, not copies out from the borrow'd manuscript
of a subservient scrowl, by way of imitating. As well might she be said in her
Sacrament of water to imitate the baptisme of Iohn. What though she retaine
excommunication us'd in the Synagogue, retain the morality of the Sabbath, she
does not therefore imitate the law her underling, but perfect her. All that was
morally deliver'd from the law to the Gospell in the office of the Priests and
Levites, was that there should be a ministery set a part to teach and discipline
the Church, both which duties the Apostles thought good to commit to the
Presbyters. And if any distinction of honour were to be made among them, they
directed it should be to those not that only rule well, but especially to those
that labour in the word and doctrine. By which we are taught that laborious
teaching is the most honourable Prelaty that one Minister can have above another
in the Gospell: if therefore the superiority of Bishopship be grounded on the
Priesthood as part of the morall law, it cannot be said to be an imitation; for
it were ridiculous that morality should imitate morality, which ever was the
same thing. This very word of patterning or imitating excludes Episcopacy from
the solid and grave Ethicall law, and betraies it to be a meere childe of
ceremony, or likelier some misbegotten thing, that having pluckt the gay
feathers of her obsolet bravery to hide her own deformed barenesse, now vaunts
and glories in her stolne plumes. In the meane while what danger there is
against the very life of the Gospell to make in any thing the typical law her
pattern, and how impossible in that which touches the Priestly government,
I shall use such light as I have receav'd, to lay open. It cannot be unknowne by
what expressions the holy Apostle S. Paul spares not to explane to us the nature
and condition of the law, calling those ordinances which were the chiefe and
essentiall offices of the Priests, the elements and rudiments of the world both
weake and beggarly. Now to breed, and bring up the children of the promise, the
heirs of liberty and grace under such a kinde of government as is profest to be
but an imitation of that ministery which engender'd to bondage the sons of Agar,
how can this be but a foul injury and derogation, if not a cancelling of that
birth-right and immunity which Christ hath purchas'd for us with his blood. For
the ministration of the law consisting of carnall things, drew to it such
a ministery as consisted of carnall respects, dignity, precedence, and the like.
And such a ministery establish't in the Gospell, as is founded upon the points
and termes of superiority, and nests it selfe in worldly honours, will draw to
it, and we see it doth, such a religion as runnes back againe to the old pompe
and glory of the flesh. For doubtlesse there is a certaine attraction and
magnetick force betwixt the religion and the ministeriall forme thereof. If the
religion be pure, spirituall, simple, and lowly, as the Gospel most truly is,
such must the face of the ministery be. And in like manner if the forme of the
Ministery be grounded in the worldly degrees of autority, honour, temporall
jurisdiction, we see it with our eyes it will turne the inward power and purity
of the Gospel into the outward carnality of the law; evaporating and exhaling
the internall worship into empty conformities, and gay shewes. And what remains
then but that wee should runne into as dangerous and deadly apostacy as our
lamented neighbours the Papists, who by this very snare and pitfall of imitating
the ceremonial law, fel into that irrecoverable superstition, as must needs make
void the cov'nant of salvation to them that persist in this blindnesse.

CHAP. IV.

That it is impossible to make the Priesthood of Aaron a pattern whereon to
ground Episcopacy.

That which was promis'd next, is to declare the impossibility of grounding
Evangelick government in the imitation of the Jewish Priesthood: which will be
done by considering both the quality of the persons, and the office it selfe.
Aaron and his sonnes were the Princes of their Tribe before they were sanctified
to the Priesthood: that personall eminence which they held above the other
Levites, they receav'd not only from their office, but partly brought it into
their office: and so from that time forward the Priests were not chosen out of
the whole number of the Levites, as our Bishops, but were borne inheritors of
the dignity. Therefore unlesse we shall choose our Prelats only out of the
Nobility, and let them runne in a blood, there can be no possible imitation of
Lording over their brethren in regard of their persons altogether unlike. As for
the office wch was a representation of Christs own person more immediately in
the high Priest, & of his whole priestly office in all the other; to the
performanoe of wch the Levits were but as servitors & Deacons, it was necessary
there should be a distinction of dignity betweene two functions of so great ods.
But there being no such difference among our Ministers, unlesse it be in
reference to the Deacons, it is impossible to found a Prelaty upon the imitation
of this Priesthood. For wherein, or in what worke is the office of a Prelat
excellent above that of a Pastor? in ordination you'l say; but flatly against
Scripture, for there we know Timothy receav'd ordination by the hands of the
Presbytery, notwithstanding all the vaine delusions that are us'd to evade that
testimony, and maintaine an unwarrantable usurpation. But wherefore should
ordination be a cause of setting up a superior degree in the Church? is not that
whereby Christ became our Saviour a higher and greater worke, then that whereby
he did ordaine messengers to preach and publish him our Saviour? Every Minister
sustains the person of Christ in his highest work of communicating to us the
mysteries of our salvation, and hath the power of binding and absolving, how
should he need a higher dignity to represent or execute that which is an
inferior work in Christ? why should the performance of ordination which is
a lower office exalt a Prelat, and not the seldome discharge of a higher and
more noble office wch is preaching and administring much rather depresse him?
Verily neither the nature, nor the example of ordination doth any way require an
imparity betweene the ordainer and the ordained. For what more naturall then
every like to produce his like, man to beget man, fire to propagate fire, and in
examples of highest opinion the ordainer is inferior to the ordained; for the
Pope is not made by the precedent Pope, but by Cardinals, who ordain and
consecrate to a higher and greater office then their own.

CHAP. V.

To the Arguments of B. Andrews and the Primat.

It followes here to attend to certaine objections in a little treatise lately
printed among others of like sort at Oxford, and in the title said to be out of
the rude draughts of Bishop Andrews. And surely they bee rude draughts indeed,
in so much that it is marvell to think what his friends meant to let come abroad
such shallow reasonings with the name of a man so much bruited for learning. In
the 12 and 23 pages he seemes most notoriously inconstant to himselfe; for in
the former place he tels us he forbeares to take any argument of Prelaty from
Aaron, as being the type of Christ. In the latter he can forbeare no longer, but
repents him of his rash gratuity, affirming, that to say, Christ being come in
the flesh, his figure in the high Priest ceaseth, is the shift of an Anabaptist;
and stiffly argues that Christ being as well King as Priest, was as well
fore-resembled by the Kings then, as by the high Priest. So that if his comming
take away the one type, it must also the other. Marvellous piece of divinity!
and well worth that the land should pay six thousand pound a yeare for, in
a Bishoprick, although I reade of no Sophister among the Greeks that was so
dear, neither Hippias nor Protagoras, nor any whom the Socratick schoole
famously refuted with out hire. Here we have the type of the King sow'd to the
typet of the Bishop, suttly to cast a jealousie upon the Crowne, as if the right
of Kings, like Meleager in the Metamorphosis, were no longer liv'd then the
firebrand of Prelaty. But more likely the Prelatss fearing (for their own guilty
carriage protests they doe feare) that their faire dayes cannot long hold,
practize by possessing the King with this most false doctrine, to ingage his
power for them, as in his owne quarrell, that when they fall they may fall in
a generall ruine, just as cruell Tyberius would wish,

    When I dye, let the earth be roul'd in flames. 

But where, O Bishop, doth the purpose of the law set forth Christ to us as
a King? That which never was intended in the Law, can never be abolish't as part
thereof. When the Law was made, there was no King: if before the law, or under
the law God by a speciall type in any King would foresignifie the future
kingdome of Christ, which is not yet visibly come, what was that to the law? The
whole ceremoniall law, and types can be in no law else, comprehends nothing but
the propitiatory office of Christs Priesthood, which being in substance
accomplisht, both law and Priesthood fades away of it selfe, and passes into
aire like a transitory vision, and the right of Kings neither stands by any type
nor falls. We acknowledge that the civill magistrate weares an autority of Gods
giving, and ought to be obey'd as his vicegerent. But to make a King a type, we
say is an abusive and unskilfull speech, and of a morall solidity makes it seeme
a ceremoniall shadow. Therefore your typical chaine of King and Priest must
unlink. But is not the type of Priest taken away by Christs comming? no saith
this famous Protestant Bishop of Winchester; it is not, and he that saith it is,
is an Anabaptist. What think ye Readers, do ye not understand him? What can be
gather'd hence but that the Prelat would still sacrifice? conceave him readers,
he would missificate. Their altars indeed were in a fair forwardnesse; and by
such arguments as these they were setting up the molten Calfe of their Masse
againe, and of their great Hierarch the Pope. For if the type of Priest be not
taken away, then neither of the high Priest, it were a strange beheading; and
high Priest more then one there cannot be, and that one can be no lesse then
a Pope. And this doubtlesse was the bent of his career, though never so
covertly. Yea but there was something else in the high Priest besides the
figure, as is plain by S. Pauls acknowledging him. Tis true that in the 17 of
Deut. whence this autority arises to the Priest in matters too hard for the
secular judges, as must needs be many in the occasions of those times involv'd
so with ceremoniall niceties, no wonder though it be commanded to enquire at the
mouth of the Priests, who besides the Magistrates their collegues had the Oracle
of Urim to consult with. And whether the high Priest Ananias had not incroach't
beyond the limits of his Priestly autority, or whether us'd it rightly, was no
time then for S. Paul to contest about. But if this instance be able to assert
any right of jurisdiction to the Clergy, it must impart it in common to all
Ministers, since it were a great folly to seeke for counsell in a hard intricat
scruple from a Dunce Prelat, when there might be found a speedier solution from
a grave and learned Minister, whom God hath gifted with the judgement of Urim
more amply oft-times then all the Prelates together; and now in the Gospell hath
granted the privilege of this oraculous Ephod alike to all his Ministers. The
reason therefore of imparity in the Priests, being now as is aforesaid, really
annull'd both in their person, and in their representative office, what right of
jurisdiction soever can be from this place Levitically bequeath'd, must descend
upon the Ministers of the Gospell equally, as it findes them in all other points
equall. Well then he is finally content to let Aaron go. Eleazar will serve his
turne, as being a superior of superiors, and yet no type of Christ in Aarons
life time. O thou that would'st winde into any figment, or phantasme to save thy
Miter! Yet all this will not fadge, though it be cunningly interpolisht by some
second hand with crooks & emendations; Heare then; the type of Christ in some
one particular, as of entring yearly into the Holy of holies and such like,
rested upon the High Priest only as more immediately personating our Saviour:
but to resemble his whole satisfactory office all the lineage of Aaron was no
more then sufficient. And all, or any of the Priests, consider'd separately
without relation to the highest, are but as a livelesse trunk and signfie
nothing. And this shewes the excellence of Christs sacrifice, who at once and in
one person fulfill'd that which many hunderds of Priests many times repeating
had anough to forshew. What other imparity there was among themselves, we may
safely suppose it depended on the dignity of their birth and family, together
with the circumstances of a carnall service, which might afford many priorities.
And this I take to be the summe of what the Bishop hath laid together to make
plea for Prelaty by imitation of the Law. Though indeed, if it may stand, it
will inferre Popedome all as well. Many other courses he tries, enforcing
himselfe with much ostentation of endlesse genealogies, as if he were the man
that S. Paul forewarnes us of in Timothy, but so unvigorously, that I do not
feare his winning of many to his cause, but such as doting upon great names are
either over-weake, or over sudden of faith. I shall not refuse therefore to
learne so much prudence as I finde in the Roman Souldier that attended the
crosse, not to stand breaking of legs, when the breath is quite out of the body,
but passe to that which follows. The Primat of Armagh at the beginning of his
tractat seeks to availe himselfe of that place in the 66 of Esaiah, I will take
of them for Priests and Levites, saith the Lord; to uphold hereby such a forme
of superiority among the ministers of the Gospell succeeding those in the law,
as the Lords day did the Sabbath. But certain if this method may be admitted of
interpreting those propheticall passages concerning Christian times in
a punctuall correspondence, it may with equall probability be urg'd upon us,
that we are bound to observe some monthly solemnity answerable to the new moons,
as well as the Lords day which we keepe in lieu of the Sabbath: for in the 23 v.
the Prophet joynes them in the same manner together, as before he did the
Priests and Levites, thus. And it shall come to passe that from one new moone to
another, and from one Sabbath to another shall all flesh come to worship before
me, saith the Lord. Undoubtedly with as good consequence may it be alledg'd from
hence, that we are to solemnize some religious monthly meeting different from
the Sabbath, as from the other any distinct formality of Ecclesiasticall orders
may be inferr'd. This rather will appeare to be the lawfull and unconstrain'd
sense of the text, that God in taking of them for Priests and Levites, will not
esteeme them unworthy though Gentiles, to undergoe any function in the Church,
but will make of them a full and perfect ministery, as was that of the Priests
and Levites in their kinde. And Bishop Andrews himselfe to end the controversie,
sends us a candid exposition of this quoted verse from the 24 page of his said
book, plainly deciding that God by those legall names there of Priests and
Levites means our Presbyters, and Deacons, for which either ingenuous
confession, or slip of his pen we give him thanks, and withall to him that
brought these treatises into one volume, who setting the contradictions of two
learned men so neere together, did not foresee. What other deducements or
analogies are cited out of S. Paul to prove a likenesse betweene the Ministers
of the Old and New Testament, having tri'd their sinewes I judge they may passe
without harme doing to our cause. We may remember then that Prelaty neither hath
nor can have foundation in the law, nor yet in the Gospell, which assertion as
being for the plainnesse thereof a matter of eye sight, rather then of
disquisition I voluntarily omitt, not forgetting to specifie this note againe,
that the earnest desire which the Prelates have to build their Hierarchy upon
the sandy bottome of the law, gives us to see abundantly the little assurance
which they finde to reare up their high roofs by the autority of the Gospell,
repulst as it were from the writings of the Apostles, and driven to take
sanctuary among the Jewes. Hence that open confession of the Primat before
mention'd. Episcopacy is fetcht partly from the patterne of the Old Testament,
& partly from the New as an imitation of the Old, though nothing can be more
rotten in Divinity then such a position as this, and is all one as to say
Episcopacy is partly of divine institution, and partly of mans own carving. For
who gave the autority to fetch more from the patterne of the law then what the
Apostles had already fetcht, if they fetcht any thing at all, as hath beene
prov'd they did not. So was Jereboams Episcopacy partly from the patterne of the
law, and partly from the patterne of his owne carnality; a parti-colour'd and
a parti-member'd Episcopacy, and what can this be lesse then a monstrous? Others
therefore among the Prelats perhaps not so well able to brook, or rather to
justifie this foule relapsing to the old law, have condiscended at last to
a plaine confessing that both the names and offices of Bishops and Presbyters at
first were the same, and in the Scriptures no where distinguisht. This grants
the remonstrant in the fift Section of his defence, and in the Preface to his
last short answer. But what need respect be had whether he grant or grant it
not, when as through all antiquity, and even in the loftiest times of Prelaty we
find it granted. Jerome the learned'st of the Fathers hides not his opinion,
that custome only, which the Proverbe cals a tyrant, was the maker of Prelaty;
before his audacious workmanship the Churches were rul'd in common by the
Presbyters. and such a certaine truth this was esteem'd, that it became a decree
among the Papall Canons compil'd by Gratian. Anselme also of Canturbury, who to
uphold the points of his Prelatisme made himselfe a traytor to his country, yet
commenting the Epistles to Titus and the Philippians acknowledges from the
cleernesse of the text, what Ierome and the Church Rubrick hath before
acknowledg'd. He little dreamt then that the weeding-hook of reformation would
after two ages pluck up his glorious poppy from insulting over the good corne.
Though since some of our Brittish Prelates seeing themselves prest to produce
Scripture, try all their cunning, if the New Testament will not help them, to
frame of their own heads as it were with wax a kind of Mimick Bishop limm'd out
to the life of a dead Priesthood. Or else they would straine us out a certaine
figurative Prelat, by wringing the collective allegory of those seven Angels
into seven single Rochets. Howsoever since it thus appeares that custome was the
creator of Prelaty being lesse ancient then the government of Presbyters, it is
an extreme folly to give them the hearing that tell us of Bishops through so
many ages: and if against their tedious muster of citations, Sees, and
successions, it be reply'd that wagers and Church antiquities, such as are
repugnant to the plaine dictat of Scripture are both alike the arguments of
fooles, they have their answer. We rather are to cite all those ages to an
arraignment before the word of God, wherefore, and what pretending, how
presuming they durst alter that divine institution of Presbyters, which the
Apostles who were no various and inconstant men surely had set up in the
Churches, and why they choose to live by custome and catalogue, or as S. Paul
saith by sight and visibility, rather then by faith? But first I conclude from
their owne mouthes that Gods command in Scripture, which doubtlesse ought to be
the first and greatest reason of Church-government, is wanting to Prelaty. And
certainly we have plenteous warrant in the doctrine of Christ to determine that
the want of this reason is of it selfe sufficient to confute all other presences
that may be brought in favour of it.

CHAP. VI.

That Prelaty was not set up for prevention of Schisme, as is pretended, or if it
were, that it performes not what it was first set up for, but quite the
contrary.

Yet because it hath the outside of a specious reason, & specious things we know
are aptest to worke with humane lightnesse and frailty, even against the
solidest truth, that sounds not plausibly, let us think it worth the examining
for the love of infirmer Christians, of what importance this their second reason
may be. Tradition they say hath taught them that for the prevention of growing
schisme the Bishop was heav'd above the Presbyter. And must tradition then ever
thus to the worlds end be the perpetuall canker-worme to eat out Gods
Commandements? are his decrees so inconsiderate and so fickle, that when the
statutes of Solon, or Lycurgus shall prove durably good to many ages, his in 40
yeares shall be found defective, ill contriv'd, and for needfull causes to be
alter'd? Our Saviour and his Apostles did not only foresee, but foretell and
forewarne us to looke for schisme. Is it a thing to be imagin'd of Gods wisdome,
or at least of Apostolick prudence to set up such a government in the
tendernesse of the Church, as should incline, or not be more able then any other
to oppose it selfe to schisme? it was well knowne what a bold lurker schisme was
even in the houshold of Christ betweene his owne Disciples and those of Iohn the
Baptist about fasting: and early in the Acts of the Apostles the noise of
schisme had almost drown'd the proclaiming of the Gospell; yet we reade not in
Scripture that any thought was had of making Prelates, no not in those places
where dissention was most rife. If Prelaty had beene then esteeem'd a remedy
against schisme, where was it more needfull then in that great variance among
the Corinthians which S. Paul so labour'd to reconcile? and whose eye could have
found the fittest remedy sooner then his? and what could have made the remedy
more available, then to have us'd it speedily? and lastly what could have beene
more necessary then to have written it for our instruction? yet we see he
neither commended it to us, nor us'd it himselfe. For the same division
remaining there, or else bursting forth againe more then 20 yeares after S.
Pauls death, wee finde in Clements Epistle of venerable autority written to the
yet factious Corinthians, that they were still govern'd by Presbyters. And the
same of other Churches out of Hermas, >and divers other the scholers of the
Apostles by the late industry of the learned Salmatius appeares. Neither yet did
this worthy Clement S. Pauls disciple, though writing to them to lay aside
schisme, in the least word advise them to change the Presbyteriall government
into Prelaty. And therefore if God afterward gave, or permitted this
insurrection of Episcopacy, it is to be fear'd he did it in his wrath, as he
gave the Israelites a King. With so good a will doth he use to alter his own
chosen government once establish'd. For marke whether this rare device of mans
braine thus preferr'd before the ordinance of God, had better successe then
fleshly wisdome not counseling with God is wont to have. So farre was it from
removing schisme, that if schisme parted the congregations before, now it rent
and mangl'd, now it rag'd. Heresie begat heresie with a certaine monstrous haste
of pregnancy in her birth, at once borne and bringing forth. Contentions before
brotherly were now hostile. Men went to choose their Bishop as they went to
a pitcht field, and the day of his election was like the sacking of a City,
sometimes ended with the blood of thousands. Nor this among hereticks only, but
men of the same beliefe, yea confessors, and that with such odious ambition,
that Eusebius in his eighth book testifies he abhorr'd to write. And the reason
is not obscure, for the poore dignity or rather burden of a Parochial Presbyter
could not ingage any great party, nor that to any deadly feud: but Prelaty was
a power of that extent, and sway, that if her election were popular, it was
seldome not the cause of some faction or broil in the Church. But if her dignity
came by favour of some Prince, she was from that time his creature, and
obnoxious to comply with his ends in state were they right or wrong. So that in
stead of finding Prelaty an impeacher of Schisme or faction, the more I search,
the more I grow into all perswasion to think rather that faction and she as with
a spousall ring are wedded together, never to be divorc't. But here let every
one behold the just, and dreadfull judgement of God meeting with the audacious
pride of man that durst offer to mend the ordinances of heaven. God out of the
strife of men brought forth by his Apostles to the Church that beneficent and
ever distributing office of Deacons, the stewards and Ministers of holy almes,
man out of the pretended care of peace & unity being caught in the snare of his
impious boldnesse to correct the will of Christ, brought forth to himselfe upon
the Church that irreconcileable schisme of perdition and Apostasy, the Roman
Antichrist: for that the exaltation of the Pope arose out of the reason of
Prelaty it cannot be deny'd. And as I noted before that the patterne of the High
Priest pleaded for in the Gospel (for take away the head Priest the rest are but
a carcasse) sets up with better reason a Pope, then an Archbishop, for if
Prelaty must still rise and rise till it come to a Primat, why should it stay
there? when as the catholick government is not to follow the division of
kingdomes, the temple best representing the universall Church, and the High
Priest the universall head; so I observe here, that if to quiet schisme there
must be one head of Prelaty in a land or Monarchy rising from a Provinciall to
a nationall Primacy, there may upon better grounds of repressing schisme be set
up one catholick head over the catholick Church. For the peace and good of the
Church is not terminated in the schismelesse estate of one or two kingdomes, but
should be provided for by the joynt consultation of all reformed Christendome:
that all controversie may end in the finall pronounce or canon of one
Arch-primat, or Protestant Pope. Although by this meanes for ought I see, all
the diameters of schisme may as well meet and be knit up in the center of one
grand falshood. Now let all impartiall men arbitrate what goodly inference these
two maine reasons of the Prelats have, that by a naturall league of consequence
make more for the Pope then for themselves. Yea to say more home are the very
wombe for a new subantichrist to breed in; if it be not rather the old force and
power of the same man of sin counterfeiting protestant. It was not the
prevention of schisme, but it was schisme it selfe, and the hatefull thirst of
Lording in the Church that first bestow'd a being upon Prelaty; this was the
true cause, but the pretence is stil the same. The Prelates, as they would have
it thought, are the only mawls of schisme. Forsooth if they be put downe,
a deluge of innumerable sects will follow; we shall be all Brownists, Familists,
Anabaptists. For the word Puritan seemes to be quasht, and all that heretofore
were counted such, are now Brownists. And thus doe they raise an evill report
upon the expected reforming grace that God hath bid us hope for, like those
faithlesse spies, whose carcasses shall perish in the wildernesse of their owne
confused ignorance, and never taste the good of reformation. doe they keep away
schisme? if to bring a num and chil stupidity of soul, an unactive blindnesse of
minde upon the people by their leaden doctrine, or no doctrine at all, if to
persecute all knowing and zealous Christians by the violence of their courts, be
to keep away schisme, they keep away schisme indeed; and by this kind of
discipline all Italy and Spaine is as purely and politickly kept from schisme as
England hath beene by them. With as good a plea might the dead palsie boast to
a man, tis I that free you from stitches and paines, and the troublesome feeling
of cold & heat, of wounds and stroke; if I were gone, all these would molest
you. The Winter might as well vaunt it selfe against the Spring, I destroy all
noysome and rank weeds, I keepe downe all pestilent vapours. Yes and all
wholesome herbs, and all fresh dews, by your violent & hidebound frost; but when
the gentle west winds shall open the fruitfull bosome of the earth thus
over-girded by your imprisonment, then the flowers put forth and spring, and
then the Sunne shall scatter the mists, and the manuring hand of the Tiller
shall root up all that burdens the soile without thank to your bondage. But
farre worse then any frozen captivity is the bondage of Prelates, for that
other, if it keep down any thing which is good, within the earth, so doth it
likewise that which is ill, but these let out freely the ill, and keep down the
good, or else keepe downe the lesser ill, and let out the greatest. Be asham'd
at last to tell the Parlament ye curbe Schismaticks, when as they know ye
cherish and side with Papists, and are now as it were one party with them, and
tis said they helpe to petition for ye. Can we believe that your government
strains in good earnest at the petty gnats of schisme, when as we see it makes
nothing to swallow the Camel heresie of Rome; but that indeed your throats are
of the right Pharisaical straine. Where are those schismaticks with whom the
Prelats hold such hot skirmish? shew us your acts, those glorious annals which
your Courts of loathed memory lately deceas'd have left us? those schismaticks
I doubt me wil be found the most of them such as whose only schisme was to have
spoke the truth against your high abominations and cruelties in the Church; this
is the schisme ye hate most, the removall of your criminous Hierarchy.
A politick government of yours, and of a pleasant conceit, set up to remove
those as a pretended schisme, that would remove you as a palpable heresie in
government. If the schisme would pardon ye that, she might go jagg'd in as many
cuts and slashes as she pleas'd for you. As for the rending of the Church, we
have many reasons to thinke it is not that which ye labour to prevent so much as
the rending of your pontificall sleeves: that schisme would be the sorest
schisme to you, that would be Brownisme and Anabaptisme indeed. If we go downe,
say you, as if Adrians wall were broke, a flood of sects will rush in. What
sects? What are their opinions? give us the Inventory; it will appeare both by
your former prosecutions and your present instances, that they are only such to
speake of as are offended with your lawlesse government, your ceremonies, your
Liturgy, an extract of the Masse book translated. But that they should be
contemners of publick prayer, and Churches us'd without superstition, I trust
God will manifest it ere long to be as false a slander, as your former slanders
against the Scots. Noise it till ye be hoarse; that a rabble of Sects will come
in, it will be answer'd ye, no rabble sir Priest, but a unanimous multitude of
good Protestants will then joyne to the Church, which now because of you stand
separated. This will be the dreadfull consequence of your removall. As for those
terrible names of Sectaries and Schismaticks which ye have got together, we know
your manner of fight, when the quiver of your arguments which is ever thin, and
weakly stor'd, after the first brunt is quite empty, your course is to betake ye
to your other quiver of slander, wherein lyes your best archery. And whom ye
could not move by sophisticall arguing, them you thinke to confute by scandalous
misnaming. Thereby inciting the blinder sort of people to mislike and deride
sound doctrine and good christianity under two or three vile and hatefull terms.
But if we could easily indure and dissolve your doubtiest reasons in argument,
we shall more easily beare the worst of your unreasonablenesse in calumny and
false report. Especially being fortold by Christ, that if he our Master were by
your predecessors call'd Samaritan and Belzebub, we must not think it strange if
his best Disciples in the reformation, as at first by those of your tribe they
were call'd Lollards and Hussites, so now by you be term'd Puritans, and
Brownists. But my hope is that the people of England will not suffer themselves
to be juggl'd thus out of their faith and religion by a mist of names cast
before their eyes, but will search wisely by the Scriptures, and look quite
through this fraudulent aspersion of a disgracefull name into the things
themselves: knowing that the Primitive Christians in their times were accounted
such as are now call'd Familists and Adamites, or worse. And many on the
Prelatickside like the Church of Sardis have a name to live, and yet are dead;
to be Protestants, and are indeed Papists in most of their principles. Thus
perswaded, this your old fallacy wee shall soone unmask, and quickly apprehend
how you prevent schisme, and who are your schismaticks. But what if ye prevent,
and hinder all good means of preventing schisme? that way which the Apostles
us'd, was to call a councell; from which by any thing that can be learnt from
the fifteenth of the Acts, no faithfull Christian was debarr'd, to whom
knowledge and piety might give entrance. Of such a councell as this every
parochiall Consistory is a right homogeneous and constituting part being in it
selfe as it were a little Synod, and towards a generall assembly moving upon her
own basis in an even and firme progression, as those smaller squares in battell
unite in one great cube, the main phalanx, an embleme of truth and
stedfastnesse. Whereas on the other side Prelaty ascending by a graduall
monarchy from Bishop to Arch-bishop, from thence to Primat, and from thence, for
there can be no reason yeilded neither in nature, nor in religion, wherefore, if
it have lawfully mounted thus high, it should not be a Lordly ascendent in the
horoscope of the Church, from Primate to Patriarch, and so to Pope. I say
Prelaty thus ascending in a continuall pyramid upon pretence to perfect the
Churches unity, if notwithstanding it be found most needfull, yea the utmost
helpe to dearn up the rents of schisme by calling a councell, what does it but
teach us that Prelaty is of no force to effect this work which she boasts to be
her maister-peice; and that her pyramid aspires and sharpens to ambition, not to
perfection, or unity. This we know, that as often as any great schisme disparts
the Church, and Synonds be proclam'd, the Presbyters have as great right there,
and as free vote of old, as the Bishops, which the Canon law conceals not. So
that Prelaty if she will seek to close up divisions in the Church, must be
forc't to dissolve, and unmake her own pyramidal figure, which she affirmes to
be of such uniting power, when as indeed it is the most dividing and
schismaticall forme that Geometricians know of, and must be faine to inglobe, or
incube her selfe among the Presbyters; which she hating to do, sends her haughty
Prelates from all parts with their forked Miters, the badge of schisme or the
stampe of his cloven foot whom they serve I think, who according to their
hierarchies acuminating still higher and higher in a cone of Prelaty, in stead
of healing up the gashes of the Church, as it happens in such pointed bodies
meeting, fall to gore one another with their sharpe spires for upper place, and
precedence, till the councell it selfe prove the greatest schisme of all. And
thus they are so farre from hindring dissension, that they have made
unprofitable, and even noysome the chiefest remedy we have to keep Christendom
at one, which is by councels: and these if wee rightly consider Apostolick
example, are nothing else but generall Presbyteries. This seem'd so farre from
the Apostles to think much of, as if hereby their dignity were impair'd, that,
as we may gather by those Epistles of Peter and Iohn, which are likely to be
latest written when the Church grew to a setling, like those heroick patricians
of Rome (if we may use such comparison) hasting to lay downe their dictatorship,
they rejoys't to call themselves and to be as fellow Elders among their
brethren. Knowing that their high office was but as the scaffolding of the
Church yet unbuilt, and would be but a troublesome disfigurement, so soone as
the building was finisht. But the lofty minds of an age or two after, such was
their small discerning, thought it a poore indignity, that the high rear'd
government of the Church should so on a sudden, as it seem'd to them, squat into
a Presbytery. Next or rather before councels the timeliest prevention of schisme
is to preach the Gospell abundantly and powerfully throughout all the land, to
instruct the youth religiously, to endeavour how the Scriptures may be easiest
understood by all men; to all which the proceedings of these men have been on
set purpose contrary. But how O Prelats should you remove schisme, and how
should you not remove and oppose all the meanes of removing schism? when Prelaty
is a schisme it selfe from the most reformed and most flourishing of our
neighbour Churches abroad, and a sad subject of discord and offence to the whole
nation at home. The remedy which you alledge is the very disease we groan under;
and never can be to us a remedy but by removing it selfe. Your predecessors were
believ'd to assume this preeminence above their brethren only that they might
appease dissention. Now God and the Church cals upon you, for the same reason to
lay it down, as being to thousands of good men offensive, burdensome,
intolerable. Surrender that pledge which unlesse you fowlely usurpt it, the
Church gave you, and now claimes it againe, for the reason she first lent it.
Discharge the trust committed to you, prevent schisme, and that ye can never do,
but by discharging your selves. That government which ye hold, we confesse
prevents much, hinders much, removes much; but what? the schisms and grievances
of the Church? no, but all the peace and unity, all the welfare not of the
Church alone, but of the whole kingdome. And if it be still permitted ye to
hold, will cause the most sad I know not whether separation be enough to say,
but such a wide gulph of distraction in this land as will never close her
dismall gap, untill ye be forc't (for of your selvs ye wil never do as that
Roman Curtius nobly did) for the Churches peace & your countries, to leap into
the midst, and be no more seen. By this we shal know whether yours be that
ancient Prelaty which you say was first constituted for the reducement of quiet
& unanimity into the Church, for then you wil not delay to prefer that above
your own preferment. If otherwise, we must be confident that your Prelaty is
nothing else but your ambition, an insolent preferring of your selves above your
brethren, and all your learned scraping in antiquity even to disturbe the bones
of old Aaron and his sonnes in their graves, is but to maintain and set upon our
necks a stately and severe dignity, which you call sacred, and is nothing in
very deed but a grave and reverent gluttony, a sanctimonious avarice, in
comparison of which, all the duties and dearnesses which ye owe to God or to his
Church, to law, custome, or nature, ye have resolv'd to set at nought. I could
put you in mind what counsell Clement a fellow labourer with the Apostles gave
to the Presbyters of Corinth, whom the people though unjustly sought to remove.
Who among you saith he, is noble minded, who is pittifull, who is charitable,
let him say thus, if for me this sedition, this enmity, these differences be,
I willingly depart, I go my wayes, only let the flock of Christ be at peace with
the Presbyters that are set over it. He that shall do this, saith he, shall get
him great honour in the Lord, and all places will receave him. This was Clements
counsell to good and holy men that they should depart rather from their just
office, then by their stay, to ravle out the seamlesse garment of concord in the
Church. But I have better counsell to give the Prelats, and farre more
acceptable to their eares, this advice in my opinion is fitter for them. Cling
fast to your Pontificall Sees, bate not, quit your selves like Barons, stand to
the utmost for your haughty Courts and votes in Parliament. Still tell us that
you prevent schisme, though schisme and combustion be the very issue of your
bodies, your first born; and set your country a bleeding in a Prelaticall
mutiny, to fight for your pompe, and that ill favour'd weed of temporall honour
that sits dishonourably upon your laick shoulders, that ye may be fat and
fleshy, swoln with high thoughts and big with mischievous designes, when God
comes to visit upon you all this forescore yeares vexation of his Church under
your Egyptian tyranny. For certainly of all those blessed soules which you have
persecuted, and those miserable ones which you have lost, the just vengeance
does not sleepe.

CHAP. VII.

hindrance, but a hastning of reformation.

As for those many Sects and divisions rumor'd abroad to be amongst us, it is not
hard to perceave that they are partly the meere fictions and false alarmes of
the Prelates, thereby to cast amazements and panick terrors into the hearts of
weaker Christians that they should not venture to change the present deformity
of the Church for fear of I know not what worse inconveniencies. With the same
objected feares and suspicions, we know that suttle Prelat Gardner sought to
divert the first reformation. It may suffice us to be taught by S. Paul that
there must be sects for the manifesting of those that are sound hearted. These
are but winds and flaws to try the floting vessell of our faith whether it be
stanch and sayl well, whether our ballast be just, our anchorage and cable
strong. By this is seene who lives by faith and certain knowledge, and who by
credulity and the prevailing opinion of the age; whose vertue is of an
unchangeable graine, and whose of a slight wash. If God come to trie our
constancy we ought not to shrink, or stand the lesse firmly for that, but passe
on with more stedfast resolution to establish the truth though it were through
a lane of sects and heresies on each side. Other things men do to the glory of
God: but sects and errors it seems God suffers to be for the glory of good men,
that the world may know and reverence their true fortitude and undaunted
constancy in the truth. Let us not therefore make these things an incumbrance,
or an excuse of our delay in reforming, which God sends us as an incitement to
proceed with more honour and alacrity. For if there were no opposition where
were the triall of an unfained goodnesse and magnanimity? vertue that wavers is
not vertue, but vice revolted from it selfe, and after a while returning. The
actions of just and pious men do not darken in their middle course; but Solomon
tels us they are as the shining light, that shineth more and more unto the
perfet day. But if we shall suffer the trifling doubts and jealousies of future
sects to overcloud the faire beginnings of purpos'st reformation, let us rather
fear that another proverb of the same Wiseman be not upraided to us, that the
way of the wicked is as darknesse, they stumble at they know not what. If sects
and schismes be turbulent in the unsetl'd estate of a Church, while it lies
under the amending hand, it best beseems our Christian courage to think they are
but as the throws and pangs that go before the birth of reformation, and that
the work it selfe is now in doing. For if we look but in the nature of
elementall and mixt things, we know they cannot suffer any change of one kind,
or quality into another without the struggl of contrarieties. And in things
artificiall, seldome any elegance is wrought without a superfluous wast and
refuse in the transaction. No Marble statue can be politely carv'd, no fair
edifice built without almost as much rubbish and sweeping. Insomuch that even in
the spirituall conflict of S. Pauls conversion there fell scales from his eyes
that were not perceav'd before. No wonder then in the reforming of a Church
which is never brought to effect without the fierce encounter of truth and
falshood together, if, as it were the splinters and shares of so violent
a jousting, there fall from between the shock many fond errors and fanatick
opinions, which when truth has the upper hand, and the reformation shall be
perfeted, will easily be rid out of the way, or kept so low, as that they shall
be only the exercise of our knowledge, not the disturbance, or interruption of
our faith. As for that which Barclay in his image of minds writes concerning the
horrible and barbarous conceits of Englishmen in their religion. I deeme it
spoken like what hee was, a fugitive Papist traducing the Iland whence he
sprung. It may be more judiciously gather'd from hence, that the Englishman of
many other nations is least atheisticall, and bears a naturall disposition of
much reverence and awe towards the Deity; but in his weaknesse and want of
better instruction, which among us too frequently is neglected, especially by
the meaner sort, turning the bent of his own wits with a scrupulous and
ceaselesse care what he might do to informe himselfe aright of God and his
worship, he may fall not unlikely sometimes as any otherland man into an uncouth
opinion. And verily if we look at his native towardlinesse in the roughcast
without breeding, some nation or other may haply be better compos'd to
a naturall civility, and right judgement then he. But if he get the benefit once
of a wise and well rectifi'd nurture, which must first come in generall from the
godly vigilance of the Church, I suppose that where ever mention is made of
countries manners, or men, the English people among the first that shall be
prais'd, may deserve to be accounted a right pious, right honest, and right
hardy nation. But thus while some stand dallying and deferring to reform for
fear of that which should mainly hasten them forward, lest schism and error
should encrease, we may now thank our selves and our delayes if instead of
schism a bloody and inhumane rebellion be strook in between our slow movings.
Indeed against violent and powerfull opposition there can be no just blame of
a lingring dispatch. But this I urge against those that discourse it for
a maxim, as if the swift opportunities of establishing, or reforming religion,
were to attend upon the fleam of state businesse. In state many things at first
are crude and hard to digest, which only time and deliberation can supple, and
concoct. But in religion wherein is no immaturity, nothing out of season, it
goes farre otherwise. The doore of grace turnes upon smooth hinges wide opening
to send out, but soon shutting to recall the precious offers of mercy to
a nation: which unlesse Watchfulnesse and Zeale two quick-sighted and
ready-handed Virgins be there in our behalfe to receave, we loose: and still the
ofter we loose, the straiter the doore opens, and the lesse is offer'd. This is
all we get by demurring in Gods service. Tis not rebellion that ought to be the
hindrance of reformation, but it is the want of this which is the cause of that.
The Prelats which boast themselves the only bridlers of schisme God knows have
been so cold and backward both there and with us to represse heresie and
idolatry, that either through their carelessenesse or their craft all this
mischiefe is befaln. What can the Irish subject do lesse in Gods just
displeasure against us, then revenge upon English bodies the little care that
our Prelats have had of their souls. Nor hath their negligence been new in that
Iland but ever notorious in Queen Elizabeths dayes, as Camden their known friend
forbears not to complain. Yet so little are they toucht with remorce of these
their cruelties, for these cruelties are theirs, the bloody revenge of those
souls which they have famisht, that whenas against our brethren the Scots, who
by their upright and loyall deeds have now bought themselves an honourable name
to posterity, whatsoever malice by slander could invent, rage in hostility
attempt, they greedily attempted, toward these murdrous Irish the enemies of God
and mankind, a cursed off-spring of their own connivence, no man takes notice
but that they seeme to be very calmely and indifferently affected. Where then
should we begin to extinguish a rebellion that hath his cause from the
mis-government of the Church, where? but at the Churches reformation, and the
removall of that government which persues and warres with all good Christians
under the name of schismaticks, but maintains and fosters all Papists and
Idolaters as tolerable Christians. And if the sacred Bible may be our light, we
are neither without example, nor the witnesse of God himselfe, that the
corrupted estate of the Church is both the cause of tumult, and civill warres,
and that to stint them, the peace of the Church must first be setl'd. Now for
a long season, saith Azariah to King Asa, Israel hath beene without the true
God, and without a teaching Priest, and without law: and in those times there
was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations
were upon all the inhabitants of the countries. And nation was destroy'd of
nation, and City of City, for God did vex them with all adversity. Be ye strong
therefore, saith he to the reformers of that age, and let not your hands be
weake, for your worke shall bee rewarded. And in those Prophets that liv'd in
the times of reformation after the Captivity often doth God stirre up the people
to consider that while establishment of Church matters was neglected, and put
off, there was no peace to him that went out or came in, for I, saith God, had
set all men every one against his neighbour. But from the very day forward that
they went seriously, and effectually about the welfare of the Church, he tels
them that they themselves might perceave the sudden change of things into
a prosperous and peacefull condition. But it will here be said that the
reformation is a long work, and the miseries of Ireland are urgent of a speedy
redresse. They be indeed; and how speedy we are, the poore afflicted remnant of
our martyr'd countrymen that sit there on the Sea-shore, counting the houres of
our delay with their sighs, and the minuts with their falling teares, perhaps
with the destilling of their bloody wounds, if they have not quite by this time
cast off, and almost curst the vain hope of our founder'd ships, and aids, can
best judge how speedy we are to their reliefe. But let their succors be hasted,
as all need and reason is, and let not therefore the reformation which is the
chiefest cause of successe and victory be still procrastinated. They of the
captivity in their greatest extremities could find both counsell and hands
anough at once to build, and to expect the enemies assault. And we for our parts
a populous and mighty nation must needs be faln into a strange plight either of
effeminacy, or confusion, if Ireland that was once the conquest of one single
Earle with his privat forces, and the small assistance of a petty Kernish
Prince, should not take up all the wisdome and prowesse of this potent Monarchy
to quell a barbarous crew of rebels, whom if we take but the right course to
subdue, that is beginning at the reformation of our Church, their own horrid
murders and rapes will so fight against them, that the very sutlers and horse
boyes of the Campe will be able to rout and chase them without the staining of
any Noble sword. To proceed by other method in this enterprize, be our Captains
and Commanders never so expert, will be as great an error in the art of warre,
as any novice in souldiership ever committed. And thus I leave it as a declared
truth, that neither the feare of sects no nor rebellion can be a fit plea to
stay reformation, but rather to push it forward with all possible diligence and
speed. 
